Improved formulations and algorithmic components for the electric
       vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging functions
      Aurélien Froger1                   Jorge E. Mendoza1                  Ola Jabali2              Gilbert Laporte3

                          1
                              Université de Tours, LIFAT (EA 6300), ROOT (ERL CNRS 7002), Tours, France
                  2
                      Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
              3
                  Canada Research Chair in Distribution Management, HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada H3T 2A7


                                                              Abstract

       Electric vehicle routing problems (E-VRPs) are receiving growing attention from the operations research
   community. Electric vehicles differ substantially from internal combustion engine vehicles, the main differ-
   ence lying in their limited autonomy, which can be recovered at charging stations. Modeling the charging
   functions is a focal point of E-VRPs. Most of the research has focused on constant or linear charging
   functions. The E-VRP with nonlinear charging function (E-VRP-NL) was recently introduced to account
   for the more realistic nonlinear relationship between the time spent charging and the amount of energy
   charged. We propose two new formulations for this problem. We first develop an arc-based tracking of
   the time and the state of charge which, according to our experiments, outperforms the classical node-based
   tracking of these values. To avoid replicating the charging stations nodes, as done for both node and arc
   based formulations, we also introduce a path-based model. We develop an algorithm to generate a tractable
   number of these paths. This path-based model outperforms the classical models in our experiments. We
   also propose a new model, a heuristic, and an exact labeling algorithm for the problem of finding the op-
   timal charging decisions for a given route. Extensive computational results show that charging decisions
   considerably impact the quality of the E-VRP-NL solutions. Indeed, we improve 23 out of 120 best known
   E-VRP-NL solutions by solely revising the charging decisions.




This is a post-peer-review, pre-copyedit version of an article published in Computers & Operations Research. The
final authenticated version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2018.12.013


Citation for published version:
Froger A., Mendoza J.E., Jabali O., and Laporte G. (2019). Improved formulations and algorithmic components
for the electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging functions. Computers & Operations Research,
104:256-294, doi:10.1016/j.cor.2018.12.013.


c 2018. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)




                                                                   1
1      Introduction
Electric vehicles (EVs) offer a viable alternative to internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs), and their
market share is steadily increasing, partly as a result of several governmental and private policies. In parallel,
the study of problems rising from using EVs by operational researchers has gained importance in recent years,
and has given a rise to a new class of problems called electric vehicle routing problems (E-VRPs). These
problems differ from the classical vehicle routing problem (VRP) in several ways since the EV technological
constraints need to be accounted for. Indeed, the driving autonomy of EVs is limited by their battery capacity,
which can be recovered at charging stations (CSs). These are much scarcer than conventional refueling stations
for ICEVs, which means that EVs often may need to perform detours to reach a CS. The latter is especially
true in the context of mid-haul or long-haul routing (Montoya, 2016; Schiffer, 2017). In addition, charging the
battery of an EV takes much longer than refilling the tank of an ICEV. Therefore, E-VRPs involve additional
decisions such as where and how long to charge.
    The charging infrastructure, which includes the CSs used to recuperate energy of EVs, can be either public
or private. The use of the former by private companies may result in uncertainty with respect to CS availability.
Therefore, the use of public infrastructure to charge EVs in a routing context has received little attention. We
refer the reader to Sweda et al. (2017) and Kullman et al. (2018) for further details. Since the uncertainty with
respect to CS availability is neglected in the majority of the E-VRP literature, we conclude that most of the
research on E-VRPs implicitly assumes that the charging infrastructure is privately owned by the EV operator.
We adopt this assumption in this paper as well.
    Research on E-VRPs primarily started with the green vehicle routing problem (Green VRP) introduced by
Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012). In the Green VRP, a fleet of homogeneous alternative fuel vehicles must visit
a set of customers from a single depot while traveling a minimum total distance, subject to a route duration
constraint. The vehicles have a limited fuel tank capacity but can detour to CSs to extend their driving range.
The tank is fully recharged in constant time at each visit to a CS, an assumption that is appropriate for
the vehicles operating on alternative fuels such as biofuels and liquid nitrogen. With respect to EVs, such
an assumption makes sense if batteries are replaced by fully loaded batteries at swapping stations. To our
knowledge, however, battery swapping does not seem to be on the path of massive adoption. Indeed, the
company Better Place that offered battery swapping services declared bankruptcy in 20131 and Tesla’s only
battery swapping station (part of a pilot program) shut down in 20162 . Several variants of the Green VRP
have been studied. Thus Schneider et al. (2014) defined the electric routing problem with time windows and
cargo capacity constraints (E-VRPTW). In the E-VRPTW, the batteries are fully recharged at CSs. However,
the charging time is no longer assumed to be constant, it is linearly dependent on the state of charge (SoC)
of the EV upon its arrival at the CS. Finally, no route duration limit is considered. In the remainder of this
paper we use the term SoC to refer to the battery level in the EV.
    The above problems assume that whenever a charging activity is performed, it is concluded only when the
battery is fully charged. This assumption yields more tractable models, which is partly the reason behind its
adoption by earlier versions of E-VRPs. Nonetheless, assuming that the battery is fully charged whenever a
charging operation takes place is rather conservative. In view of the fact that the time needed to reach a fully
charged battery may be substantial when charging operations occur en route, Felipe et al. (2014) introduced
a partial recharging policy. Compared to a full charging policy, a partial charging policy allows savings in
both energy consumption and time. The authors assumed a linear charging process and considered CSs with
multiple technologies. Each technology has a distinct charging rate, which reflects the variety of chargers one
can encounter in practice (e.g., slow, medium, and fast). They also considered capacitated vehicles and route
duration constraints. Furthermore, Desaulniers et al. (2016) tackled a version of the E-VRPTW in which the
    1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Better_Place\_(company) - Retrieved 2018-04-10
    2 http://www.teslarati.com/tesla-shuts-down-battery-swap-program-for-superchargers/ - Retrieved 2018-04-10




                                                           2
fleet size is fixed and partial charging is allowed.
   In reality, battery charging functions of EVs are not linear (see Pelletier et al. (2017) for further details). In
order to model a more realistic charging process, Montoya et al. (2017) introduced the electric vehicle routing
problem with nonlinear charging function (E-VRP-NL). In addition to considering a partial charging policy, the
authors proposed a piecewise linear approximation of the charging process. They also showed that previously
adopted linear charging functions yield infeasible routes with respect to route maximum-duration limit, when
projected on the more realistic nonlinear charging functions. Moreover, even if the routes produced under
linear charging functions are feasible, when subjected to nonlinear charging functions they tend to be of poor
quality. The objective in the E-VRP-NL is to minimize the total time needed to serve all the customers, which
is influenced by the charging decisions because it accounts for the time spent at CSs and for the nonlinear
nature of the charging process. Using a temporal-based objective is all the more relevant since CSs may offer
multiple technologies which impact the duration of the charging operations. To solve the E-VRP-NL, Montoya
et al. (2017) developed a hybrid metaheuristic that combines an iterated local search heuristic with the solution
of a set partitioning problem. Specifically, the first stage of the algorithm aims to build a high-quality and
diverse pool of routes, while the second stage assembles solutions by selecting a subset of routes from the pool.
   Research on the E-VRPs is now moving towards more accurate representations of EV characteristics which
pose new modeling and algorithmic challenges. One of the most challenging issues when solving E-VRPs is
making good charging decisions. In general, charging operations influence feasibility and in many cases they
also increase costs, due to detours to CSs and the time spent at those CSs. Depending on the underlying
E-VRP, deciding where to charge and how much to charge can be very complex. To better deal with these
decisions, some authors have studied the fixed route vehicle charging problem (FRVCP). Given a fixed sequence
of customers, the FRCVP consists in optimally inserting charging operations within it. As such, the FRVCP
can be viewed as a subproblem of E-VRPs, which is pivotal to many heuristics that must compute the cost of
a given route. Montoya et al. (2016) solved a FRVCP with the full charging policy and constant charging time.
They formulated the problem as a constrained shortest path problem and solved it using the Pulse algorithm
(Lozano and Medaglia, 2013). Roberti and Wen (2016) described a labeling algorithm to solve the FRVCP
arising in the case where all the CSs have the same charging technology, the charging function is linear, and
partial charging is allowed. Hiermann et al. (2016), Schiffer and Walther (2017), and Hiermann et al. (2018)
considered the FRVCP as a sub-problem of the E-VRP-TW with single charging technology and linear charging
function. They tackled a special version of the problem where at most one CS can be inserted between any
pair of non-CS nodes. Note that Hiermann et al. (2016) also assumed a full charging policy. Finally, Montoya
et al. (2017) considered the FRVCP as a subproblem of the E-VRP-NL. They presented a mixed integer linear
programming (MILP) model in which they assume that an EV can visit at most one CS between any pair of
non-CS nodes and a heuristic.
   The scientific contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we propose two new mixed integer linear pro-
gramming (MILP) models for the E-VRP-NL, which is central to the E-VRP literature in that it realistically
models the EV charging operations via piecewise linear approximations of nonlinear functions, while account-
ing for various charging technologies and allowing partial recharge. The first model results from replacing the
node-based tracking of the time and SoC from the Montoya et al. (2017) model by an arc-based tracking of
these quantities. We demonstrate that this new formulation provides an equal or better LP relaxation bound.
To avoid replicating the CS nodes, as was the case in both previously discussed models, we then define the
problem on a multigraph, which allows us to derive a second model for the E-VRP-NL. We explain why this for-
mulation better fits the problem from a modeling perspective, and we also demonstrate its superiority through
extensive computational experiments. Building on the second new E-VRP-NL model, the second scientific
contribution of this paper lies in the development of three new algorithms for the FRVCP: a direct approach
that solves a MILP formulation of the problem, a heuristic algorithm, and an exact labeling algorithm. These


                                                         3
three algorithms are compared through an extensive set of computational experiments.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We formally describe the E-VRP-NL in Section 2. In
Section 3, we present a new MILP model for the problem based on its “classical” definition on a simple digraph.
In Section 4, we introduce an alternative MILP model for the E-VRP-NL using the concept of paths visiting
sequences of CSs. In Section 5, we describe a new MILP model, a heurisitic and an exact labeling algorithm
for the FRVCP. We present computational results in Section 6, followed by conclusions in Section 7.


2     The electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging func-
      tion
The electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging function, introduced by Montoya et al. (2017), is
defined as follows. Let I be the set of customers and let F be the set of CSs at which the vehicles can fully
or partially recharge their battery. Each customer i P I has a service time gi . The customers are served by
an homogeneous fleet of EVs, which is unlimited. Each EV has a battery of capacity Q (expressed in kWh)
and a maximum tour duration Tmax . At the start of the planning horizon, the EVs are located at a single
depot (denoted by node 0), from which they leave fully charged. Traveling from a location i (the depot, a
customer, or a CS) to another location j incurs a driving time tij ¥ 0 and an energy consumption eij ¥ 0. The
triangular inequality holds for both the driving time and the energy consumption. Each CS i has a charging
technology (e.g., slow, moderate, fast) associated with a piecewise linear concave charging function Φi p∆q that
maps, for an empty battery, the time ∆ spent charging at i to the SoC of the vehicle when it leaves i. If q is
the SoC of an EV when arriving at i, then the SoC of the EV upon departing from i after charging during a
time equal to ∆ is given by Φi p∆      Φ
                                        i pq qq. We denote by Bi  t0, . . . , bi u the ordered set of breakpoints of
                                          1

the piecewise linear approximation of the charging curve of CS i. Let cik and aik be the charging time and the
SoC of breakpoint k P Bi of the CS i. Let ρik be the slope of the segment joining the points pci,k1 , ai,k1 q
and pcik , aik q (i.e., ρik  paik  ai,k1 q{pcik  ci,k1 q. Figure 1 shows the piecewise linear approximation for a
CS i yielding a power of 22 kW charging a vehicle equipped with a 16 kWh battery.




Figure 1: Piecewise linear approximation for a CS yielding a power of 22 kW charging a 16 kWh battery.
Adapted from Montoya et al. (2017).


    Feasible solutions to the E-VRP-NL satisfy the following conditions: 1) each customer is served exactly once
by a single vehicle, 2) each route starts and ends at the depot, 3) each route satisfies the maximum-duration
limit Tmax , and 4) each route is energy-feasible (i.e., the battery level of an EV upon arriving at a location or
departing from it lies between 0 and Q). The objective of the E-VRP-NL is to minimize the total time needed
to serve all customers, including driving, service, and charging time.



                                                          4
3      Two CS replication-based models for the E-VRP-NL
The E-VRP-NL is defined on a digraph G  pV, Aq, where V  t0uY I Y F 1 is the set of nodes and A  tpi, j q :
i, j P V, i  j u is the set of arcs connecting nodes of V . Node 0 represents the single depot. The set F 1 contains
                                                        °
βi copies of each CS i P F (i.e., |F 1 |                     βi ). The value of βi corresponds to an upper bound on the number
                                                        P
                                                        i F
of times i can be visited. These copies are introduced for modeling convenience: each visit of an EV to a CS
is modeled as a visit to a distinct copy of the CS, i.e., each node in F 1 can be restricted to be visited at most
once. Therefore, the use of CS copies facilitates the tracking of the SoC and of the time. We denote by Fi1  F 1
                                                                                          
the set containing the βi copies of CS i (i.e., |Fi1 |  βi and F 1                          P
                                                                                                      1                         1
                                                                                              i F Fi ). We assume that Fi is an ordered set
and that its elements are numbered from 1 to βi . In the remainder of this paper, depending on the context,
we refer to an element of F 1 or Fi1 as a CS copy. Furthermore, the graph G is not necessary complete, since
some arcs cannot be traversed due to the SoC constraints. Therefore, we apply a preprocessing procedure to
reduce its size (see A).
    For the sake of completeness and clarity, we recall in §3.1 the model introduced in Montoya et al. (2017).
In §3.2 we introduce an alternative formulation, which uses a different approach to model the time and SoC
tracking.


3.1      First model for the E-VRP-NL
The formulation of Montoya et al. (2017) involves the following decision variables. The binary variable xij is
equal to 1 if and only if an EV travels on arc pi, j q P A. The continuous variables τj and yj track the time and
SoC of the EV when it departs from node j P V . The continuous variables q i and q i specify (according to the
piecewise linear approximation of the charging function of i) the SoC of an EV when it enters and leaves CS
copy i P F 1 . The variables ci and ci are the scaled start and end times for charging an EV according to the
charging function of CS copy i. The continuous variable ∆i  ci  ci represents the duration of the charging
operation performed at CS copy i. The binary variables wik and wik are equal to 1 if and only if the SoC is
between ai,k1 and aik , with k P Bi zt0u, when the EV enters and leaves CS copy i, respectively. Finally, the
continuous variables λik and λik are the coefficients associated with the breakpoint pcik , aik q in the piecewise
linear approximation, when the EV enters and leaves CS copy i, respectively. Specifically, the λik variables
enable the expression of pci , q i q as a convex combination of the breakpoints pcik , aik q, where k P Bi . Similarly,
the λik variables enable the expression of pci , q i q as a convex combination of the breakpoints pcik , aik q, where
k P Bi . The Montoya et al. (2017) model for the E-VRP-NL, denoted as rFNCS
                                                                          ode s, is as follows:
                                                                            rep



                                                                           ¸                      ¸
rFNCSoderep s                                                 minimize              tij xij           ∆i                                  (1)
                                                                         pi,j qPA              i F1
                                                                                                  P
subject to
                  ¸
                           xij  1                                                                         iPI                            (2)
                pi,j qPA
                  ¸
                           xij ¤ 1                                                                         i P F1                         (3)
                pi,j qPA
                  ¸                  ¸
                           xji               xij  0                                                      iPV                            (4)
                pj,iqPA            pi,j qPA
                eij xij  p1  xij qQ ¤ yi  yj ¤ eij xij                p1  xij qQ                       pi, j q P A : i P V, j P I     (5)
                eij xij  p1  xij qQ ¤ yi  q j ¤ eij xij               p1  xij qQ                       pi, j q P A : i P V, j P F 1   (6)

                yi ¥ ei0 xi0                                                                               pi, 0q P A                     (7)
                yi  q i                                                                                   i P F1                         (8)


                                                                           5
            y0  Q                                                                                           (9)
            qi ¤ qi                                                         i P F1                         (10)
                     ¸
            qi             λik aik                                         i P F1                         (11)
                      P
                     k Bi
                     ¸
            ci             λik cik                                         i P F1                         (12)
                      P
                     k Bi
             ¸                    ¸
                     λik                 wik                               i P F1                         (13)
             P
            k Bi               P zt0u
                              k Bi
                 ¸                    ¸
                          wik                xij                           i P F1                         (14)
             P zt0u
            k Bi                   pi,j qPA
            λi0 ¤ wi1                                                       i P F1                         (15)
            λik ¤ wik          wi,k 1                                       i P F 1 , k P Bi zt0, bi u     (16)
            λibi ¤ wibi                                                     i P F1                         (17)
                     ¸
            qi             λik aik                                         i P F1                         (18)
                      P
                     k Bi
                     ¸
            ci             λik cik                                         i P F1                         (19)
                      P
                     k Bi
             ¸                    ¸
                     λik                 wik                               i P F1                         (20)
             P
            k Bi               P zt0u
                              k Bi
                 ¸                    ¸
                          wik                xij                           i P F1                         (21)
             P zt0u
            k Bi                   pi,j qPA
            λi0 ¤ wi1                                                       i P F1                         (22)
            λik ¤ wik          wi,k 1                                       i P F,1 k P Bi zt0, bi u       (23)
            λibi ¤ wibi                                                     i P F1                         (24)
            ∆i  ci  ci                                                    i P F1                         (25)
            τi     ptij      gj qxij  Tmax p1  xij q ¤ τj                 pi, j q P A : i P V, j P I     (26)
            τi     ∆j        tij xij  pSmax        Tmax qp1  xij q ¤ τj   pi, j q P A : i P V, j P F 1   (27)
            τj     tj0 ¤ Tmax                                               jPV                            (28)
            τ0  0                                                                                         (29)
            τl  ∆l ¥ τj  ∆j                                               i P F, j, l P Fi1 , j   l      (30)
                 ¸                    ¸
                          xhj ¥             xhl                             i P F, j, l P F 1 , j
                                                                                             i      l      (31)
            ph,j qPA              ph,lqPA
            xij P t0, 1u                                                    pi, j q P A                    (32)
            τi ¥ 0, yi ¥ 0                                                  iPV                            (33)
            wik P t0, 1u, wik P t0, 1u                                      i P F 1 , k P Bi zt0u          (34)
            λik ¥ 0, λik ¥ 0                                                i P F 1 , k P Bi               (35)
            q i ¥ 0, q i ¥ 0, ∆i ¥ 0, ci ¥ 0, ci ¥ 0                        i P F 1.                       (36)

   The objective function (1) minimizes the total driving and charging time. Constraints (2) ensure that each
customer is served once, while constraints (3) state that every CS copy is visited at most once. Constraints
(4) impose the flow conservation conditions. Constraints (5) and (6) track the SoC of an EV at each node.
Constraints (7) ensure that if an EV travels between a customer or CS copy and the depot, then it has sufficient
energy to reach its destination. Constraints (8) reset the battery tracking to q i upon departure from CS copy
i. Constraint (9) states that the SoC of an EV leaving the depot is Q. Constraints (10) couple the SoC of an


                                                                    6
EV upon arrival at a CS with its SoC at departure. Constraints (11)–(17) define the SoC and the charging
time of an EV upon arrival at CS copy i, based on the piecewise linear approximation of its charging function.
Similarly, constraints (18)–(24) define the SoC and charging time of an EV upon departure from CS copy i.
Constraints (25) define the time spent at any CS copy. Constraints (26) and (27) track the departure time
from each node. The parameter Smax  maxiPF tcibi u corresponds to the maximum charging time, i.e., the
time to fully charge an empty battery at the slowest CS. Constraints (28) and (29) ensure that the EVs return
to the depot no later than Tmax . Even if they are not necessary, constraints (30) and (31) avoid potential
symmetries between the CS copies. These constraints ensure that the copies of CS i are visited in the order in
which they appear in Fi (i.e, a charging operation at j P Fi1 must start after a charging operation at l P Fi1 if
j ¡ l). Finally, constraints (32)–(36) define the domains of the decision variables.
   In order to strengthen the previous formulation, we add the following valid inequalities:

                                   yi ¥ min teil u                                                     i P V zt0u.                (37)
                                           P Yt0u
                                          l F

These inequalities state that the SoC of an EV upon departing from a node must be sufficient to reach the
depot or the nearest CS.


3.2    Second model for the E-VRP-NL

                                                                          ode s tracks the time and the
We now introduce a modeling alternative for the E-VRP-NL. Formulation rFNCS rep

SoC of the EVs with node-indexed variables. We therefore refer to constraints (5)–(9), (26)–(29), (31), (33),
and (37) as node-based tracking constraints. Here we will model the time and SoC tracking by introducing arc-
based variables. More precisely, we replace variables τj and yj with the continuous variables τij and yij , which
respectively represent the time and SoC of an EV when it departs from node i P V to travel on arc pi, j q P A.
If no vehicle travels on arc pi, j q, then both variables are 0. We model the time and SoC tracking through the
following arc-based tracking constraints which replace the node-based tracking constraints in rFNCS
                                                                                                  ode s. The
                                                                                                    rep

second model for the E-VRP-NL, denoted as rFArc
                                            CS rep
                                                   s, is as follows:
                                                                                  ¸                ¸
rFArc
  CS rep
         s                                                    minimize                   tij xij          ∆i
                                                                              pi,j qPA             i F1
                                                                                                   P
subject to

                (2)  (4), (10)  (25), (31), (32), (34)  (36)
                y0j  Qx0j                                                                                p0, j q P A             (38)
                  ¸                  ¸                     ¸
                           yij               eij xij              yjl                                   jPI                     (39)
                pi,j qPA           pi,j qPA               pj,lqPA
                  ¸                  ¸
                           yij               eij xij  q j                                               j P F1                  (40)
                pi,j qPA           pi,j qPA
                  ¸
                           yjl  q j                                                                      j P F1                  (41)
                pj,lqPA
                        
                yij ¤       Q  min teli u xij                                                            pi, j q P A             (42)
                                   P Yt0u
                                   l F
                  ¸                                            ¸
                           pτij ptij          gj q xij q               τjl                               jPI                     (43)
                pi,j qPA                                      pj,lqPA
                  ¸                                           ¸
                           pτij     tij xij q     ∆j                τjl                                  j P F1                  (44)
                pi,j qPA                                   pj,lqPA
                τij ¤ pTmax  tij  gj  tj0 q xij                                                        pi, j q P A : j P I     (45)
                                                               
                τij ¤ Tmax  tij               ∆min
                                                 j      tj0 xij                                          pi, j q P A : j P F 1   (46)


                                                                              7
                       ¸                          ¸
                               τjh  ∆j ¥                 τlh  ∆l                                         i P F, j, l P Fi1 : j   l       (47)
                     pj,hqPA                    pl,hqPA
                    τij ¥ 0, yij ¥ 0                                                                       pi, j q P A.                    (48)

     Constraints (38) state that the EVs leave the depot fully charged. Constraints (39) track the SoC of an
EV at each customer. Similarly, constraints (40) track the SoC of an EV when it arrives at a CS copy, and
constraints (41) track the SoC of the EV when it leaves a CS copy. Constraints (42) couple the variables yij
and xij . Constraints (43) and (44) track the departure time from each customer and CS copies, respectively.
Constraints (45) and (46) couple the τij and xij variables. Specifically, if an EV traverses an arc pi, j q, then
its departure time must guarantee that it returns to the depot without exceeding the tour maximum-duration
limit. The parameter ∆min
                      j   represents the minimum duration of a charging operation at j P F 1 , and is equal to
the time needed to charge the energy quantity
                                                                  l,l1 V
                                                                                 min
                                                                       P ztj u:pl,j qPA^pj,l1 qPA
                                                                                                    telj    ejl1  ell1 u if the EV has an empty
battery. It is a lower bound on the time spent charging to recover the energy consumed to make the detour
to j. Constraints (47) break symmetries created by the introduction of CS copies. Constraints (48) define the
domains of the newly introduced decision variables.
     In order to strengthen the previous formulation, we add the following valid inequalities:
                                      
                              yij ¥       eij    min tejl u xij                                        pi, j q P A : i  0.                (49)
                                                P Yt0u
                                                l F

Constraints (49) state that if an EV traverses arc pi, j q, then its SoC when leaving i must be sufficient to
traverse the arc and then reach the closest CS or depot.
     According to the experiments conducted by Ascheuer et al. (2001) on the asymmetric traveling salesman
problem with time windows, MILP solvers tend to perform better on arc-based tracking constraints, similar to
(39)–(48), than on those based on node-based tracking constraints when there are few time windows. Therefore,
                                                                               ode s using this new model may
there is ground to believe that reformulating the time and SoC tracking in rFNCS rep

yield a better computational performance. Proposition 3.1 supports this claim for the two previously presented
formulations.

Proposition 3.1. Let Parc denote the polyhedron associated with the linear relaxation of rFArc
                                                                                           CS rep
                                                                                                  s, and let
Let Pnode denote the polyhedron associated with the linear relaxation of rFNCS
                                                                             ode s. Then Parc  Pnode .
                                                                               rep


Proof. See B.


3.3       Valid inequalities for the first two models
We introduce a new set of valid inequalities to strengthen the previous rFNCS
                                                                            ode s and rFArc
                                                                              rep       CS rep
                                                                                               s formulations.
Let ecmin
      l   be the minimum amount of energy that an EV must charge at CS copy l. This corresponds to
the charge needed to recover the minimum energy consumed to make a detour to l. Specifically, ecmin
                                                                                                l   
           min
    P ztlu:pi,lqPA^pl,j qPA
i,j V
                              teil elj  eij u. Assuming an empty battery upon arrival at the CS, we can therefore state
the following valid constraints:
                                                             ¸
                                   ∆i ¥ Φi pecmin
                                              i   q                   xij                                      i P F 1.                    (50)
                                                           pi,j qPA

4       Path-based model without CS copies for the E-VRP-NL
A major drawback of the two previous formulations defined on a digraph is the need to replicate CS nodes.
Indeed, to ensure that no optimal solutions are cut off, the number of copies may have to be very large, which
affects the solution time. We can find examples where this value is equal to 4|I | (see C). However, working
with an order of |I | copies for each CS is impractical. Despite this limitation, the vast majority of MILP models


                                                                             8
for E-VRPs listed in the literature are based on the CS-replication paradigm. To our knowledge, only Montoya
et al. (2017) proposed a procedure to set the number of CS copies needed to be used in their model. They
used the same number β of CS copies for every CS. Starting with β  0, they solved the MILP formulation
to optimality with a time limit of T̄ (set to 100 hours in their experiments); β was then incremented and the
resulting MILP was solved. If β ¥ 1 and either the time limit was reached or the optimal solution obtained
with β  l had the same value as the one obtained with β  l  1, they stopped the procedure and set β  l  1.
This procedure is not optimal when the time limit is reached. Moreover, even when an instance is solved to
optimality, this procedure is not optimal (see D for examples).
   We propose an alternative model that does not use CS copies. This new model is based on enumerating the
sequence of CS nodes that can be visited by an EV between each pair of customer or depot nodes. Given two
nodes (customer or depot) i and j, we call a CS path (CSP) a simple path starting from i visiting a sequence
of CSs (possibly empty) and ending at j.
   CSPs were introduced by Andelmin (2014) as “e-paths” in the context of the E-VRPTW with partial
recharging. They were successfully used by Bartolini and Andelmin (2017) (as “refuel paths”) and constituted
the main building block of an exact algorithm for the Green VRP. They were also applied by Roberti and
Wen (2016) (as “recharging paths”) to the electric traveling salesman problem with time windows. Koç and
Karaoglan (2016) and Leggieri and Haourari (2017) employed a similar concept. In the two latter studies,
however, only one CS can be visited between any pair of nodes. This assumption may cut off optimal solutions
to the Green VRP (see Bartolini and Andelmin (2017) for an example). Because in the Green VRP the vehicles
are fully charged in constant time upon visiting a CS, the SoC of an EV after traversing a refuel path and the
time spent traveling on a path can then be computed a priori. Allowing partial charging combined with the
non-linearity of the charging functions and/or the consideration of multiple technologies (any one of the two
latter is a sufficient condition), like in the E-VRP-NL, necessitates deciding how much to charge at each CS
and thus tracking the time and SoC throughout the CSPs.
   We develop the concept of CSP for the E-VRP-NL. We redefine the problem on a directed multigraph
r  pVr , A
G         rq, where Vr  t0u Y I, and A
                                      r is the set of arcs connecting the nodes of Vr . More specifically, an arc
in Ã represents a CSP p, starting in oppq P Ṽ and ending in dppq P Ṽ . Let np denote the number of CSs in p
and let Lp  t0, 1,    , np  1u be the ordered set of CS positions in p. We denote by µp plq the CS at position
l P Lp . We note that Lp  H indicates that p does not visit any CS between oppq and dppq. Let also ep and
tp be the energy consumption and the driving time associated with CSP p P P . Given two nodes i, j P Vr , we
                                                                      
define Pij as the set of CSPs connecting i to j, and we define P           P 
                                                                          i,j Vr ,i j Pij as the set of all CSPs.



4.1    Third model for the E-VRP-NL
Our path-based formulation of the E-VRP-NL involves the following decisions variables. The binary variable
xp is equal to 1 if and only if an EV travels on CSP p P P . The continuous variables τp and yp track the time
and SoC of an EV when it departs from node oppq to node dppq on CSP p. If no vehicle travels on the CSP,
then both variables take the value of 0. For a path p, the continuous variables q pl and q pl specify the SoC of an
EV when it enters and leaves µp plq, respectively. We model the piecewise linear approximation of the charging
function following the same principle as in the first two models. The variables cpl and cpl are the scaled start
and end times for charging an EV according to the charging function of CS µp plq. The continuous variable ∆pl
represents the duration of the charging operation performed at µp plq. The binary variables wplk and wplk are
equal to 1 if and only if the SoC is between aµp plq,k1 and aµp plq,k , with k P Bi zt0u, when the EV enters and
leaves CS µp plq, respectively. The continuous variables λplk and λplk are the coefficients associated with the
breakpoint pcµp plq,k , aµp plq,k q in the piecewise linear approximation, when the EV enters and leaves CS µp plq,
respectively. The path-based formulation of the E-VRP-NL, denoted as rFArc
                                                                       P ath
                                                                             s, is as follows:


                                                        9
                                                                           
                                                                     ¸                     ¸
rFArc
  P ath
        s                                                      min         tp xp                  ∆pl                                   (51)
                                                                     P
                                                                     p P                   P
                                                                                           l Lp

subject to
                  ¸           ¸
                                   xp  1            iPI                                                                                 (52)
              P  P
             j Vr ,i j p Pij
                  ¸           ¸                ¸          ¸
                                   xp                         xp  0          i P Vr                                                    (53)
              P  P
             j Vr ,i j p Pji                  P  P
                                             j Vr ,i j p Pij
                                   
                  ¸           ¸                            ¸                                   ¸     ¸
                                   yp        ep xp             pqpl  qpl q                            yp       iPI                   (54)
              P        P
             j Vr ,j i p Pji                               P
                                                          l Lp                             P        P
                                                                                        j Vr ,j i p Pij

             yp  eoppq,µp p0q xp  q p0                  p P P : |Lp |  0                                                              (55)

             q p,l1  eµp pl1q,µp plq xp  q pl                  p P P, l P Lp zt0u                                                    (56)

             yp  Qxp              i P Vr zt0u, p P P0i                                                                                  (57)
                                   ¸
             yp  e xpp
                                         pqpl  qpl q ¥ 0            i P Vr zt0u, p P Pi0                                                (58)
                                   P
                                  l Lp

             yp ¤ Qxp              pPP                                                                                                   (59)
                                                                   
                    ¸             ¸                  ¸         ¸                    ¸                              ¸     ¸
                                        τp                         tp xp                  ∆pl       gi                      τp   iPI   (60)
              P zt0u,j i pPPji
             j Vr                                P        P
                                                j Vr ,j i p Pji                     P
                                                                                    l Lp                       P        P
                                                                                                            j Vr ,j i p Pij
                      ¸                                                             
             τp               ∆pl ¤ Tmax  tp  gdppq  tdppq,0 xp                                 pPP                                   (61)
                      P
                    l Lp
                              ¸
             q pl                  λplk aµp plqk           p P P, l P Lp                                                                (62)
                          P
                      k Bµp plq
                              ¸
             cpl                  λplk cµp plqk           p P P, l P Lp                                                                 (63)
                          P
                      k Bµp plq
                  ¸                           ¸
                              λplk                       wplk       p P P, l P Lp                                                       (64)
              P
             k Bµp plq                   P
                                       k Bµp plq   zt0u
                    ¸
                                  wplk  xp            p P P, l P Lp                                                                     (65)
              P
             k Bµp plq    zt0u
             λpl0 ¤ wpl1               p P P, l P Lp                                                                                     (66)
             λplk ¤ wplk               wpl,k 1           p P P, l P Lp , k P Bµp plq zt0, bµp plq u                                      (67)
             λplbµp plq ¤ wplbµp plq                 p P P, l P Lp                                                                       (68)
                              ¸
             q pl                  λplk aµp plqk           p P P, l P Lp                                                                (69)
                          P
                      k Bµp plq
                              ¸
             cpl                  λplk cµp plqk           p P P, l P Lp                                                                 (70)
                          P
                      k Bµp plq
                  ¸                           ¸
                              λplk                       wplk       p P P, l P Lp                                                       (71)
              P
             k Bµp plq                   P
                                       k Bµp plq   zt0u
                    ¸
                                  wplk  xp            p P P, l P Lp                                                                     (72)
              P
             k Bµp plq    zt0u
             λi0 ¤ wpl1                p P P, l P Lp                                                                                     (73)
             λplk ¤ wplk               wpl,k 1           p P P, l P Lp , k P Bµp plq zt0, bµp plq u                                      (74)
             λplbµp plq ¤ wplbµp plq                 p P P, l P Lp                                                                       (75)


                                                                               10
               ∆pl  cpl  cpl            p P P, l P Lp                                                      (76)
               xp P t0, 1u         pPP                                                                       (77)
               τp ¥ 0, yp ¥ 0           pPP                                                                  (78)
               cpl , cpl , q pl , q pl , ∆pl ¥ 0   p P P, l P Lp                                             (79)

               wplk P t0, 1u, wplk P t0, 1u           p P P, l P Lp , k P Bi zt0u                            (80)
               λplk ¥ 0, λplk ¥ 0            p P P, l P Lp , k P Bi .                                        (81)

   The objective function (51) minimizes the total driving and charging time. Constraints (52) ensure that
each customer is served once. Constraints (53) impose the flow conservation conditions. Constraints (54) track
the SoC of the EVs at each customer. Constraints (55) track the SoC of the battery upon arrival at the first
CS of each CSP. For each CSP, constraints (56) couple the SoC of an EV upon departing from a CS with the
SoC upon arriving at the next CS of the CSP. Constraints (57) state that every EV leaves the depot with a
fully charged battery. Constraints (58) ensure that if the EV travels a path between a customer node and the
depot, then it has sufficient energy to reach its destination. Constraints (59) couple the SoC tracking variable
with the arc travel variables. Constraints (60) track the departure time from each node. Constraints (61)
couple the time tracking variable with the arc travel variables, and impose the route maximum-duration limit.
Constraints (62)–(75) are related to the piecewise linear approximation of the charging function. Specifically,
constraints (62)–(68) define the SoC and the charging time of an EV upon arrival at each CS of the CSPs, and
constraints (69)–(75) define the SoC and charging time of an EV upon departure from each CS of the CSPs.
Constraints (76) define the time spent charging at every CS. Finally, constraints (77)–(81) define the domains
of the decision variables.


4.2    Dominated paths
                      r contains a very large number of arcs that grows quickly with the number of CSs and
Theoretically the set A
the number of customers. However, many of these arcs will not be part of an optimal solution. Hence, this
section is devoted to identifying CSPs that can be eliminated using dominance rules. Defining these rules is a
complex task since we need to account for the partial charging policy, the various charging technologies, and
the piecewise linearity of the charging functions.
   We first introduce the concept of recharging path (RP). We call a RP a CSP for which the SoC of the EV
upon departing from each CS – except the last visited one – is known. Indeed, the SoC required at the end of
a RP is unknown, because the destination of the EV after traveling the RP is itself unknown. We denote by
pp, φq a RP associated with CSP p where φ is a vector specifying the SoC of the EV upon departing from each
CS visited in position l P Lp ztnp  1u. Specifically, φl is the SoC of the EV upon departing from CS µp plq,
with l P Lp ztnp  1u. We refer to φ as the SoC target vector.
   Let us now assume that the SoC of the EV when departing from the origin of each CSP is known. We
denote this SoC by q and refer to it as the initial SoC. A SoC target vector is said to be feasible for a CSP
with respect to q if it leads to an energy-feasible path, that is a path in which the SoC is non-negative and less
                                                                be a CS other than the last on a CSP (i.e.,
than Q when the vehicle enters or leaves any of its nodes. Let CS
a CS visited in position l P Lp ztnp  1u when traveling a CSP p). Since the number of SoC targets at the CSs
                                                                                                          
of a RP is infinite, there is an unbounded number of RPs associated with a given CSP that contains two or
more CSs. However, Zündorf (2014) showed that for a given sequence of CS visits between two non-CS nodes,
                                                                  This is due to the piecewise linearity of
we only need to consider a limited number of SoC targets for the CSs.
                                                                                                is restricted
the charging functions. Specifically, the number of SoC targets that should be considered at a CS
by the number of breakpoints of its charging function. The possibilities are the following: 1) One can leave a
 with just enough energy to arrive to the next CS with an empty battery. 2) One can also stop charging at
CS


                                                                   11
   at any breakpoint of the charging function if the resulting SoC is larger than the SoC of the EV upon
a CS
arriving at the 
                CS. Therefore, we apply these results to RPs, and by doing so we limit the number of RPs
associated with every CSP.
   We now define a dominance rule between two RPs. To this end, we exploit the concept of SoC functions
introduced by Zündorf (2014) to solve an electric vehicle shortest path problem, which consists in finding a
minimum duration route satisfying battery constraints and allowing the EV to recharge en route. A SoC
function SoCpqp,φq , for a RP pp, φq and a given initial SoC q, maps the duration of the path t to the final SoC
of the EV at destination dppq.
   Since we assume that all charging functions are piecewise linear, a SoC function can be defined by an
ordered set of supporting points tpt1 , y1 q,    , ptk , yk qu sorted in non-decreasing order of duration. These points
are derived from the breakpoints of the charging function of the last CS in a RP according to p, φ and q.
The value t1 represents the minimal time required by an EV to travel on the RP according to the battery
constraints (no undercharging or overcharging is allowed and the SoC is sufficient to travel on each arc) and q.
A SoC function represented by tpt1 , y1 q,    , ptn , yn qu is defined as follows:
                                  $
                                  '
                                  '
                                  '   8                                                   if 0 ¤ t       t1
                                  &
                                      pt  tk1 qpyk  yk1 q
                    p q ptq  '
               SoC qp,φ
                              '                          tk
                                                                                  y k 1   if tk1 ¤ t         tk , k P t2, 3, ..., nu   (82)
                                  '
                                  % y
                                       n                                                   if t ¥ tn .


                                                     5


                                                     4


                                                     3


                                           SoC       2


                                                     1

                                                                                                   Duration
                                                     0
                                                              1   2       3         4      5   6      7        8

                                                 -   8

    Figure 2: Example of a SoC function associated with the supporting points (1, 1.5), (2, 3), and (5, 4).

Figure 2 depicts a SoC function. In this example, the first supporting point of the curve is (1, 1.5). This means
that the minimum duration to travel on the RP is equal to 1, and in this case, the SoC at the destination of
the EV is equal to 1.5. If the SoC needed at dppq is 3, the duration of the corresponding path is equal to 2
(the duration is increased due to a larger amount of energy charged at a CS previously visited by the RP). A
dominance rule between RPs having the same origin and destination can then be defined as follows:

Definition 4.1. Let pp1 , φ1 q and pp2 , φ2 q be two RPs with the same origin o  opp1 q  opp2 q and the same
destination d  dpp1 q  dpp2 q, and let q be the initial SoC of the EV at o. RP pp1 , φ1 q dominates RP
pp2 , φ2 q with respect to q if SoCpqp ,φ q ptq ¥ SoCpqp ,φ q ptq for every t ¥ 0 and there exists t1 ¥ 0 such that
SoCpqp ,φ q pt1 q ¡ SoCpqp ,φ q pt1 q. We denote this dominance by pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                                             1       1                2       2


      1   1               2   2


This definition states that a RP dominates another only if for every possible duration the EV reaches the
destination with higher or equal SoC. The dominance of RP pp1 , φ1 q over RP pp2 , φ2 q can be established by
comparing the value of SoCpqp1 ,φ1 q and SoCpqp2 ,φ2 q for all abscissas of the supporting points of both functions.
   For convenience, we also provide an equivalent definition to Definition 4.1 based on the comparison of the
                                                 q
inverse of the SoC function. Let Θpp,φq and Θqpp,φq be the maximum and minimum SoC that can be achieved
at the destination of RP pp, φq if the initial SoC is equal to q. The inverse of function SoCpqp,φq , denoted


                                                                              12
pSoCpqp,φq q1 , exists only in the interval rΘqpp,φq , Θqpp,φq s. We define its extension, denoted InvSoCqpp,φq , over the
interval r0, Qs as follows:
                                              $
                                                              1 q
                                              & pSoCpp,φq q pΘpp,φq q if 0 ¤ q̃ Θpp,φq
                                              '
                                              '
                                                       q                                  q

                         InvSoCqpp,φq pq̃ q    pSoCpqp,φq q1 pq̃q        if Θqpp,φq ¤ q̃ ¤ Θpp,φq .
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                       (83)
                                              '
                                              '
                                              % 8                          if Θpp,φq q̃ ¤ Q
                                                                                q


Note that since it is not possible to achieve a SoC 0 ¤ q̃ Θqpp,φq , the first case assumes that the time required
to reach such a q̃ is equivalent to the time needed to reach Θqpp,φq . An equivalent definition to Definition of 4.1
then reads:

Definition 4.2. Let pp1 , φ1 q and pp2 , φ2 q be two RPs with the same origin o  opp1 q  opp2 q and the same
destination d  dpp1 q  dpp2 q, and let q be the initial SoC of the EV. RP pp1 , φ1 q dominates RP pp2 , φ2 q with
respect to q if InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ and there exists q̃ 1 such that InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q
InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. This is also denoted by pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.

This definition states that a RP dominates another only if for every possible SoC at the destination it has a
shorter or equal duration. As in Definition 4.1, the dominance of RP pp1 , φ1 q over RP pp2 , φ2 q can be established
by comparing the value of InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q and InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q for all abscissas of the supporting points of both
functions.

Definition 4.3. CSP p1 is said to be non-dominated if there exists at least one RP pp1 , φ1 q and an initial
SoC q, such that for every RP pp2 , φ2 q with the same origin o  opp1 q  opp2 q and the same destination
d  dpp1 q  dpp2 q we have pp2 , φ2 q £q pp1 , φ1 q (i.e., pp2 , φ2 q does not dominate pp1 , φ1 q for an initial SoC q).

    The initial SoC q can be restricted for a RP pp, φq to take its value in the interval rqpMp,φ
                                                                                                IN
                                                                                                  q , qpp,φq s. Let
                                                                                                       M AX

%pp,φq plq denote the SoC upon arrival at CS µp plq for RP pp, φq (with l P Lp zt0u). This quantity does not
depend on the initial SoC q. The values of qpMp,φ
                                                IN      M AX
                                                 q and qpp,φq can then be defined as follows:
                              $
                              '
                              ' Q                             if oppq  0
                              &
                    p q  ' eoppq,µp p0q
                   q Mp,φ
                        IN                      if np  0 ^ oppq  0
                          '
                          % ep      min edppq,l if np  0 ^ oppq  0
                                  lPF Yt0u

                   qpMp,φq  mintQ  min el,oppq , min               t% plq eoppq,µp plq uu
                                                               P zt0u pp,φq
                        AX
                                           P Yt0u
                                          l F                 l Lp

The value qpMp,φq corresponds to the minimum SoC needed at the origin to make RP pp, φq energy-feasible. The
               IN

first element in the definition of qpMp,φ
                                        AX
                                          q corresponds to the maximum SoC achievable at the origin of the RP.
The second element considers that if the initial SoC allows the EV to reach a CS with a SoC larger than or
equal to that achievable by visiting previous CSs, then the RP that goes directly from the origin to that CS
dominates the current RP (because the driving time and energy consumption satisfy the triangular inequality).
    It is impractical to compute the non-dominated RPs for every possible initial SoC using Definition 4.3, since
there is an infinite number of possible initial SoCs (except at the depot). To resolve this issue, we show in
Lemma 4.1 how given a SoC function and an initial SoC q, we are able to compute the SoC functions for other
initial SoCs q 1 for a given RP. Based on this result, we demonstrate in Proposition 4.1 how the dominance
relationship between two different RPs with the same origin and destination can be efficiently verified.

Lemma 4.1. Let pp, φq be a RP and let q P rqpMp,φ                                                               1
                                                         q , qpp,φq s1. If the initial SoC at oppq is equal to q with
                                                        IN    M AX

q ¤ q 1 ¤ qpMp,φ
               AX                                                   q
                 q , then the inverse of the SoC function InvSoCpp,φq can be computed as follows:
    • If np  0 (i.e., p contains at least one CS)
                                                #
                               1                    InvSoCqpp,φq pq̃ q  λpqq1         if q̃ ¥ q 1  ep
       @ q̃ P r0, Qs,   InvSoCqp,φ
                                 p   q pq̃q                                                                                      (84)
                                                    InvSoCqpp,φq pq 1  ep q  λpqq1   if q̃   q 1  ep


                                                                     13
       where λpqq1  Φ        1                    1
                      µp p0q pq  eoppq,µp p0q q  Φµp p0q pq  eoppq,µp p0q q corresponds to the difference in time spent
                       1

       charging q 1  q at the first CS of the path.

    • If np  0 (i.e., p does not contain any CS)
                                                       #
                                   1                        tp          if q 1  ep ¥ q̃
       @ q̃ P r0, Qs,       InvSoCqp,φ
                                    p       q pq̃q                                                                                     (85)
                                                            8 if q1  ep                      q̃

Proof. See B.

                                                      ,φ1 q ¤ q1 ¤ qpp1 ,φ1 q and qpp2 ,φ2 q ¤ q2 ¤ qpp2 ,φ2 q , we define two
    For each pair of values q1 and q2 such that qpMp1IN             M AX           M IN              M AX

                                pp1 ,φ1 q              pp ,φ q
functions, denoted by T pp2 ,φ2 q and T pp12 ,φ12 q . Intuitively, these functions represent the maximum and minimum
differences in time for the two RPs to reach the same SoC at the destination. They are defined as follows:
                                    $
          pp1 ,φ1 q                 & max      pp ,φ q tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃ q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ qu np1 ¡ 0 ^ np2 ¡ 0
                                          q̃ PΩpp1 ,φ1 q pq q
        T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q 
                                                              ttp1  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃qu               n p1  0 ^ n p2 ¡ 0
                                                  2 2
                                    % max      p p1 ,φ1 q
                                          q̃ PΩpp ,φ q pq q
                                                  2 2
                                    $
                                    & min     pp ,φ q tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃ q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ qu np1 ¡ 0 ^ np2 ¡ 0
                                         q̃ PΩpp1 ,φ1 q pq q
          p p1 ,φ1 q
        T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q 
                                                             tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  tp2 u              n p1 ¡ 0 ^ n p2  0
                                                2 2
                                    % min     pp1 ,φ1 q
                                         q̃ PΩpp ,φ q pq q
                                                2 2


          pp ,φ q
where Ωpp12 ,φ12 q pq q is an interval equal to rmaxt0, q  mintep1 , ep2 uu, mintΘpp1 ,φ1 q , Θpp2 ,φ2 q us.
                                                                                                                        q1         q2


    We note that for a CSP with np  0, since there are no charging decisions involved, there is a single RP. This
RP cannot be dominated for every possible value of the initial SoC by other RPs, which are associated with
other CSPs, because of the triangular inequality. We therefore never verify if a RP p with np  0 is dominated.
However, such a RP may dominate other RPs. In this case, the initial SoC of RP p with np  0 must be such
that the SoC at the destination is larger than the maximum SoC attainable at the destination by the other
RPs. We also note that given two RPs pp1 , φ1 q and pp2 , φ2 q with the same origin and the same destination,
                ,φ1 q ¤ qpp2 ,φ2 q , the dominance for these two RPs must be verified only for q ¥ qpp2 ,φ2 q . Finally, we
such that qpMp1IN        M IN                                                                       M IN

note that for a RP pp, φq such that np ¡ 0, reaching the maximum SoC at the destination is established when
the EV is fully charged at the last CS of p. We note that this is independent of the value of the initial SoC q.
                                               q
Hence for simplicity we denote Θpp,φq by Θpp,φq . Based on these observations, the dominance test between the
                                                                        pp1 ,φ1 q                                      pp1 ,φ1 q
                     ,φ1 q ¤ qpp2 ,φ2 q ) needs to be carried for q P rQpp ,φ q , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s (when the first element is less
two RPs (where qpMp1IN        M IN

                                                                                                   pp1 ,φ1 q
                                                                                                               2   2

than or equal to the second element) where Qpppp1 ,φ 1q
                                                  ,φ q
                                                        and Qpp2 ,φ2 q are defined as follows:
                                                                              2    2

                                $
                                '  M IN
                                & qpp2 ,φ2 q
                                '                                                                         if np1 ¥ 1 ^ np2 ¥ 1
               Qpppp1 ,φ 1q
                      ,φ q
                                           tp
                                    max q Mp2IN         q
                                              ,φ2 , Θ p2 ,φ2    p         q        eopp1 q,dpp1 q u if np1  0 ^ np2 ¥ 1
                                '
                                '
                                            tp                      eopp2 q,dpp2 q u if np1 ¥ 1 ^ np2  0
                    2   2
                                %         M IN
                                                        q
                                    max q p2 ,φ2 , Θ p1 ,φ1     p         q
                pp1 ,φ1 q
               Qpp2 ,φ2 q  mintqpMp1AX,φ1 q , qpp2 ,φ2 q u
                                                      M AX



   Observe that if Qpppp1 ,φ   1q
                           2 ,φ2 q
                                   ¡ Qpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq , then we cannot derive any dominance relationship. Moreover, if np1 ¡ 0
and Θpp1 ,φ1 q    Θpp2 ,φ2 q , then the EV can have a higher SoC after traversing pp2 , φ2 q compared to the one
obtained after traversing pp1 , φ1 q, which means that there does not exist q such that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
Similarly, if np2 ¡ 0 and Θpp2 ,φ2 q                   Θpp1 ,φ1 q , then there does not exist q such that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q. The
following result allows us to compute intervals for the initial SoC for which there may exist a dominance between
RPs.

Proposition 4.1. Let pp1 , φ1 q and pp2 , φ2 q be two RPs with the same origin o  opp1 q  opp2 q and the same
destination d  dpp1 q  dpp2 q such that qpMp1IN                                                                    pp1 ,φ1 q
                                                ,φ1 q ¤ qpp2 ,φ2 q . For k P t1, 2u, let qk be a parameter equal to Qpp ,φ q
                                                         M IN

                                                                                  pp1 ,φ1 q
                                                                                                                                        2   2

if npk  0 and qpMpkIN                    pp1 ,φ1 q
                     ,φk q otherwise. If Qpp ,φ q ¤ Qpp2 ,φ2 q , the following statements hold:
                                                            2       2




                                                                                         14
• Case 1: np1  0 or Θpp1 ,φ1 q ¥ Θpp2 ,φ2 q :
                                                                                                                    pp1 ,φ1 q
  – if for an initial SoC q P rQpppp1 ,φ 1q
                                      ,φ q
                                            , mintep1 , ep2 us, we have T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q and
          pp ,φ q
                                                              2   2

        T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q     ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we can state that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q
                                                             pp1 ,φ1 q                                                      pp1 ,φ1 q          pp1 ,φ1 q
  – if for an initial SoC q P rmintep1 , ep2 u, Qpp2 ,φ2 q ss, we have maxtT pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu ¤
                                     pp ,φ q                      pp ,φ q
        ∆p1 pq q ∆p2 pq q and mintT pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu                             ∆p1 pq q ∆p2 pq q, then we can state that
        pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q
• Case 2: np2  0 or Θpp2 ,φ2 q ¥ Θpp1 ,φ1 q

  – if for an initial SoC q P rQpppp1 ,φ 1q                                                              pp ,φ q
                                            , mintep1 , ep2 us, we have T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q and
                                      ,φ q
          pp1 ,φ1 q
                                                  2       2

        T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we can state that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                                                           pp1 ,φ1 q                          pp ,φ q              pp ,φ q
  – if for an initial SoC q P rmintep1 , ep2 u, Qpp2 ,φ2 q ss, we have mintT pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¥
                                     pp1 ,φ1 q                  pp1 ,φ1 q
        ∆p1 pq q ∆p2 pq q and maxtT pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¡ ∆p1 pq q ∆p2 pq q, then we can state that
        pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                         pp1 ,φ1 q                                    pp ,φ q
where ∆p pq q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , αq, and U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , αq are defined as follows:
              #
                   Φ
                    µp p0q pq  eoppq,µp p0q q
                     1
                                                          if np ¥ 1
∆p pq q 
                   0                                      if np  0
                                      $
                                      '       p t  minte 1 , e 2 uuq  InvSoCpp2 ,φ2 q pmaxt0, q  e 2 uq
                                              q1
                                      & InvSoCpp1 ,φ1 q max 0, q
                                      '
                                                                                             p   p                                q2                   p
                                                                                                                                                             if np1 ¥ 1
  pp1 ,φ1 q
U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , αq    tp1  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pmaxt0, q  ep2 uq if np1  0 ^ α  1
                               '
                               '
                               % tp1  InvSoCq2
                                              pp2 ,φ2 q pq  minte 1 , e 2 uq if np1  0 ^ α  2
                                                                   p    p
                               $
                                      '       p t  ep uq  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uuq
                                              q1
                                      & InvSoCpp1 ,φ1 q max 0, q
                                      '                                             1                       2                                    1     2
                                                                                                                                                             if np2 ¥ 1
  pp ,φ q
U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , αq 
    1     1
                               InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  mintep , ep uq  tp
                                                  1
                                                                         if np  0 ^ α  1
                                                                                1       2            2
                                                                                                                2       2


    2     2                  '
                             '
                                                      1       1                                                         2


                                      pp ,φ q pmaxt0, q  e uq  t     if np  0 ^ α  2
                             % InvSoCq            1        p       p                1            2
                                                      1       1                                                     2



Proof. See B.

    Using this proposition, we design an algorithm that enumerates all non-dominated CSPs between any
pair of nodes i, j P Vr belonging to the multigraph. We first build a directed graph Ĝij  pNij , Aij q, where
Nij  ti, j u Y F . For each CS node l P F , we create the arcs pi, lq and pl, j q. For each pair of CSs l, l1 , we
also create the arc pl, l1 q. We also consider the arc pi, j q. We apply the preprocessing rules described in A on
Ĝij . We then solve on this graph a multi-objective constrained shortest path problem from i to j where 1)
the two objectives are the minimization of the total duration of the path (driving + charging time) and the
maximization of the final SoC; 2) there is a constrained resource: the energy (i.e., the SoC of the EV must
always be in the interval r0, Qs); and 3) the SoC upon leaving i and the SoC needed upon reaching j are
unknown. To this end, we use a label-correcting algorithm where each label represents a RP. A SoC function
is associated with each RP pp, φq assuming that the initial SoC is equal to qpMp,φ
                                                                                 IN
                                                                                  q . Non-dominated CSPs are
then associated with Pareto optimal RPs. We outline the pseudo-code of our label-correcting algorithm in
Algorithm 1.
    We initialize the algorithm with one label at node j representing a RP associated with arc (i,j). We also
initialize the algorithm with one label for each l P F such that pi, lq P Aij . This label represents a partial
RP associated with partial CSP (i,l). At each iteration of the algorithm, we select the label (among the
unprocessed labels) with the minimum duration and we extend it along the arcs of Ĝij . Selecting this specific
label is intended to reduce the number of labels the algorithm generates. If we extend a label along an arc
pl, l1 q, then the new label consists of the translation of the SoC function along the vector (tll1 , ell1 ). Note
that some supporting points of the new SoC function (after the extension along arc pl, l1 q) can have a negative


                                                                                        15
     Algorithm 1: ComputeCSPs(i,j)
      input : Ĝij
      output: a set containing all the non-dominated CSPs between i and j
 1    forall l P Nij ztiu do L1 plq Ð H (L1 plq stores the unprocessed labels associated with node l) ;
 2    forall l P Nij ztiu do L2 plq Ð H (L2 plq stores the processed labels associated with node l) ;
 3    Add to L2 pj q the RP associated with arc pi, j q
 4    R Ð H (R stores nodes from Nij ztiu with unprocessed labels)
 5    forall l P F such that pi, lq P Aij do
 6        Add to L1 plq the label corresponding to the RP starting at i and going directly to l
 7    end
 8    R   Ð tl P F : pi, lq P Aij u
 9    while R      H do
10         l Ð minElement(R) (gets from R the node which has associated the unprocessed label with the minimum total time)
11         ppl , φl q Ð deleteMin(L1 plq) (removes from L1 plq the label with the minimum total time)
12         if L1 plq  H then R Ð Rztlu ;
13         Update(L2 plq, ppl , φl q)
14         forall pl, l1 q P Ĝij do
15               if IsExtendable(ppl , φl q,l1 ) then (checks if RP pp, φq can be extended to node l1 )
16                    ppl1 , φl1 q ÐExtendpppl , φl q, l1 q (extends RP ppl , φl q to node l1 )
17                    K ÐCreateLabelspppl1 , φl1 qq (if l1 is a CS and pl1 contains more than a CS, then it creates the relevant labels
                       according to the supporting points of the SoC function associated with RP ppl1 , φl1 q, otherwise K only
                       contains ppl1 , φl1 q)
18                    forall pp, φq P K do
19                          Update(L1 pl1 q, pp, φq) (inserts RP pp, φq in L1 pl1 q if it is not dominated according to Proposition 4.1, and
                              verifies if previously inserted labels become dominated)
20                      end
21                      if L1 l1 has changed and l1
                              pq                      R R then R Ð R Y tl1 u ;
22                end
23          end
24    end
25    P   ÐH
26          p
      forall pj , φj   q P L2 pj q do
27          if pj   R P then P Ð P Y tpj u ;
28    end
29    return P



y-coordinate, which implies violating a resource constraint. Therefore, we do not consider these points. If
all the supporting points of the new SoC function have a negative y-coordinate, then traversing the arc is
impossible. If l1 is a CS, we need to set the SoC target value at the previous CS (if there is any in the current
path). We note that setting this SoC target value requires knowing the successive CS (if it exists). Stopping
charging at the previous CS encountered in the path and starting charging at the current CS is only relevant
at a supporting point of the current SoC function (Zündorf, 2014). Hence we create one new label for each
supporting point of the current SoC function in order to explore the possibility of switching over to the new CS
at that point: Note that we can restrict the creation of new labels to the case where the slope of the charging
function at the new CS is larger than that of the current SoC function. For each of these labels, the new SoC
function is derived from the charging function associated with the new CS. Moreover, whenever we obtain a
new label at a node, we check whether the corresponding partial RP is non-dominated before accepting it and
we verify if previously generated labels associated with the same node become dominated. Specifically, using
the result of Proposition 4.1 we can identify intervals for the SoC at the departure from i for which the newly
generated label is dominated by or dominates a processed or an unprocessed label associated with the same
node. If a RP pp, φq becomes dominated for every SoC q P rqpMp,φq , qpp,φq s, then it can be safely removed from
                                                               IN    M AX

the set of labels. The algorithm terminates when there are no more labels to set at the destination node.


                                                                        16
      To speed up the algorithm, we do not extend a label pp, φq associated with a node l to a node l1 if at least
one of the following conditions is met: 1) the sum of the minimum duration associated with the SoC function
at the current label (i.e., the x-coordinate of the first supporting point), the driving time tll1 , and the quantity
t0i     tl 1 j   tj0 is larger than the sum of the duration limit Tmax and the quantity Φ                  1
                                                                                         µp p0q pQq; 2) If l is a CS
                                                                                           1

node, then while scanning the nodes of the route backwards we encounter the same node l1 without having
scanned before a CS with a faster technology (note that a CS can be visited more than once in a path). The
latter condition is due to the positivity of the energy consumption and driving time.


5       The fixed route vehicle charging problem
Building on the insights obtained by the previous sections, we now focus on the fixed route vehicle charging
problem (FRVCP) which is a subproblem of the E-VRP-NL. We recall that FRVCPs are fundamental sub-
problems of E-VRP heuristics. Let Π be a route that does not visit any CS. The objective of the FRVCP is to
determine the charging operations (where to insert the CSs and how much to charge), in order to minimize the
total route duration while satisfying the following conditions: the customers in the resulting route are visited
in the initial order, and the resulting route is energy-feasible and satisfies the maximum-duration limit. We
restrict our attention to routes that cannot be traveled by an EV without the need to recharge the battery. We
therefore need to insert CSs in the route to make it energy-feasible. Figure 3 shows an example of the FRVCP
with a route serving four customers and the possibility of visiting two CSs (as many times as necessary). In
the FRVCP we allow an EV to visit several CSs between two successive non-CS nodes. Many studies focus
on a more restricted version of the FRVCP in which an EV can visit at most one CS between two successive
non-CS nodes. We denote this restricted version by FRVCP-1.




                  Figure 3: Example of a fixed route vehicle charging problem with route (0,2,7,5,3,0).


      Here we propose three alternative algorithms to solve the FRVCP. Let Π  p π p0q, π p1q,    , π piq,    ,
π pnpΠq  1q, π pnpΠqq q be a fixed route, where π p0q and π pnpΠqq represent the depot and the remaining π piq
are the visited customers. We first describe in §5.1 a preprocessing procedure to reduce the size of the search
space. We then present in §5.2 a MILP formulation for the problem. Contrary to the formulation by Montoya
et al. (2017), our model accounts for visits to multiple CSs between any pair of non-CS nodes. Finally, we
present in §5.3 an exact labeling algorithm for this formulation. Montoya et al. (2017) also introduced a greedy
heuristic for the FRVCP. Contrary to their formulation, their heuristic allows visiting a number of CSs between
two successive nodes of Π. Building on their work, we develop in §5.4 a new FRVCP heuristic.


5.1        Preprocessing procedure
Our preprocessing procedure works as follows. We first compute, according to Π and Tmax , the maximum
time that is possible to spend detouring and charging at CSs. Using this value, we identify a priori the set of
feasible CS insertions and the set of feasible consecutive CS visits between every pair of consecutive nodes of
Π. We also remove additional infeasible connections between the nodes of Π and the CSs. More specifically,


                                                           17
                                                                                                                     °npΠq1
we perform the following preprocessing steps: 1) Let ∆tpΠq  Tmax                                                        
                                                                                                                         i 0       pq p
                                                                                                                                 tπ i ,π i 1q be the maximum
time that is possible to spend detouring and charging at CSs; 2) Let π piq be the i                                             th
                                                                                                                                    node in Π and j a CS. For
i P t0, . . . , npΠq  1u, if tπpiq,j             tj,πpi 1q  tπpiq,πpi 1q ¡ ∆tpΠq, then we forbid the insertion of CS j between
nodes π piq and π pi       1q; 3) Let j, j 1 be two different CSs. If tπpiq,j                              tj,j 1    tj 1 ,πpi 1q  tπpiq,πpi 1q ¡ ∆tpΠq, then
we forbid visiting CS j 1 after j between nodes π piq and π pi                                 1q; 4) Let i, j be two nodes that belong to Π or
to F . If minlPF Yt0u teli u           eij       minlPF Yt0u tejl u ¡ Q, then we forbid visiting node j directly after node i (since
it violates the battery constraints).


5.2     A path-based model for the FRVCP
Building on the path-based formulation proposed in Section 4, we now propose a MILP formulation for the
FRVCP. Let P pΠq be the set of CSPs between two consecutive nodes of route Π. To generate these paths,
we use the labeling algorithm described in Algorithm 1. The construction of the underlying graph takes into
account the results of the preprocessing procedure. We use the same decisions variables as in formulation
rFArc
   P ath
         s but we define them only for paths belonging to P pΠq. The binary variable xp is equal to 1 if and only
if an EV travels on CSP p P P pΠq. For a path p, continuous variable yp track the time at which the EV leaves
oppq. The variables cpl and cpl are the scaled start and end times for charging an EV according to the charging
function of CS µp plq. Continuous variables q pl and q pl specify (according to the piecewise linear approximation
of the charging function) the SoC of an EV when it enters and leaves µp plq, i.e., the CS at position l P Lp .
The continuous variable ∆pl represents the duration of the charging operation performed at µp plq. The binary
variables wplk and wplk are equal to 1 if and only if the SoC is between aµ plq,k1 and aµ plq,k , with k P Bi zt0u, p                  p

when the EV enters and leaves CS µp plq, respectively. The continuous variables λplk and λplk are the coefficients
associated with the breakpoint pcµ plq,k , aµ plq,k q in the piecewise linear approximation, when the EV enters
                                                      p             p

and leaves CS µp plq, respectively. Let ep and tp be the energy consumption and the driving time associated
with path p P P . A formulation of the FRVCP for a route Π, denoted as rF RP ath pΠqs, is as follows:

                                                                                           
                                                                                    ¸                      ¸
rF RP ath pΠqs                                                     minimize                tp xp                   ∆pl                                  (86)
                                                                                   P p q
                                                                                  p P Π                    P
                                                                                                           l Lp


subject to
                       ¸
                                       xp  1,             i P t0,    , npΠq  1u                                                                     (87)
                  P
                 p Pπpiq,πpi    1  q
                                       
                       ¸                                       ¸                               ¸
                                       yp    ep xp                 pqpl  qpl q                          yp ,          i P t1,    , npΠq  1u      (88)
                  P
                 p Pπpi1q,πpiq                                P
                                                              l Lp                         Pπpiq,πpi   q
                                                                                                       1


                 yp  eoppq,µp p0q xp  q p0 ,                  p P P pΠq : |Lp |  0                                                                    (89)

                 q p,l1  eµp pl1q,µp plq xp  q pl ,                      p P P pΠq, l P Lp zt0u                                                      (90)
                                                 
                            ¸                                            ¸
                                                 yp    ep xp                 pqpl  qpl q ¥ 0,                                                        (91)
                  P
                 p PπpnpΠq1q,πpnpΠqq                                    P
                                                                         l Lp

                 yp  Qxp ,                p P Pπp0q,πp1q                                                                                                (92)
                 yp ¤ Qxp ,                p P P pΠq                                                                                                     (93)
                           
                   ¸                         ¸                     p q
                                                                   n ¸
                                                                     Π 1
                           tp xp                    ∆pl                      gπpiq ¤ Tmax                                                               (94)
                  P p q
                 p P Π                       P
                                             l Lp                    
                                                                    i 1
                               ¸
                 q pl                  λplk aµp plqk          p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                                         (95)
                           P
                          k Bµp plq



                                                                                    18
                             ¸
              cpl                  λplk cµp plqk         p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                     (96)
                         P
                        k Bµp plq
                    ¸                      ¸
                             λplk                       wplk    p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                              (97)
                P
               k Bµp plq               P
                                      k Bµp plq   zt0u
                    ¸
                                  wplk  xp          p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                          (98)
                P
               k Bµp plq   zt0u
              λpl0 ¤ wpl1             p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                                         (99)
              λplk ¤ wplk            wpl,k 1         p P P pΠq, l P Lp , k P Bµp plq zt0, bµp plq u                            (100)
              λplbµp plq ¤ wplbµp plq             p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                            (101)
                             ¸
              q pl                 λplk aµp plqk         p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                    (102)
                         P
                        k Bµp plq
                             ¸
              cpl                  λplk cµp plqk         p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                    (103)
                         P
                        k Bµp plq
                    ¸                      ¸
                             λplk                       wplk    p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                             (104)
                P
               k Bµp plq               P
                                      k Bµp plq   zt0u
                    ¸
                                  wplk  xp          p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                         (105)
                P
               k Bµp plq   zt0u
              λi0 ¤ wpl1             p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                                         (106)
              λplk ¤ wplk            wpl,k 1         p P P pΠq, l P Lp , k P Bµp plq zt0, bµp plq u                            (107)
              λplbµp plq ¤ wplbµp plq             p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                            (108)
              ∆pl  cpl  cpl              p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                                   (109)
              xp P t0, 1u,            p P P p Πq                                                                               (110)
              yp ¥ 0           p P P p Πq                                                                                      (111)
              cpl , cpl , q pl , q pl , ∆pl ¥ 0          p P P pΠq, l P Lp                                                     (112)

              wplk P t0, 1u, wplk P t0, 1u                  p P P, l P Lp , k P Bi zt0u                                        (113)
              λplk ¥ 0, λplk ¥ 0              p P P, l P Lp , k P Bi .                                                         (114)

   The objective function (86) minimizes the total driving and charging time in the route. Constraints (87)
ensure the selection of a CSP between each pair of successive non-CS nodes. The remaining constraints are
similar to those introduced for model rFArc
                                        P ath
                                              s.

5.3    An exact labeling algorithm for the FRVCP
We now present an exact labeling algorithm for the FRVCP. We apply it on a directed graph GpΠq that contains
the nodes of the initial route Π and the CS nodes. To enforce the order of the visits of the nodes that belong
to Π, we replicate the CS nodes in such a way that one copy of every CS is associated with one arc of the
initial route Π. Specifically, for every value of i between 0 and npΠq  1, we create a copy lpiq of CS l P F .
We then create the arc pπ piq, π pi            1qq, the arcs pπ piq, lpiqq and plpiq, π pi       1qq for each CS l P F , and the arcs
plpiq, l1 piqq for each pair of CS l, l1 P F . It is worth mentioning that we only add these arcs to the graph if they
still exist after running the preprocessing routines introduced in §5.1. Figure 4 depicts the graph considered
for the example of Figure 3.
   The FRVCP can then be defined as a constrained shortest path problem from π p0q to π pnpΠqq on GpΠq.
The objective is to minimize the path duration while the SoC acts as a resource constraint (i.e., the SoC must
always be in the interval r0, Qs). To solve this problem, we propose the label-setting algorithm described in
Algorithm 3, which shares many similarities with Algorithm 1. Algorithm 3 uses RPs as labels and exploits


                                                                        19
Figure 4: Graph considered when applying the labeling algorithm to solve the fixed route vehicle charging
problem with route (0,2,7,5,3,0).


the concept of SoC functions presented in §4.2. Relaxing an arc and setting a label at a CS follows the same
procedure as the one described in in §4.2. The algorithm terminates as soon as a label for node npΠq is set.
The quantity of energy charged at the last CS of this RP is computed such that the EV reaches the depot with
an empty battery.
   To improve the efficiency of the algorithm, we apply two different strategies. We make use of lower bounds.
Since we know the sequence of nodes to visit, we compute beforehand at each node j P GpΠq lower bounds
                                                                    Ñ
                                                                    Ý
using Dijkstra’s algorithm. We first compute a lower bound tj on the time and a lower bound Ý
                                                                                            Ñ
                                                                                            ej on the
energy required to finish the route by running a backward search from π pnpΠqq. If Ý
                                                                                   Ñ
                                                                                   ej is larger than Q, we can
                      Ñ
                      Ý                                      Ñj will be charged using the fastest charging rate.
                                                             Ý
increase the value of tj by assuming that the difference Q  e
                                 Ñ Ý
                                 Ý Ñ
Specifically, we set the value of tj to tj          Ñj  Qu{ρ where ρ corresponds to the steepest slope for a
                                                    Ý
                                             maxt0, e
segment of the piecewise linear approximation of the charging functions. We also compute a lower bound Ð
                                                                                                       eÝj on
the energy consumption from the departing depot to node j by running a forward search from π p0q. Then, we
do not extend a label associated with a node i to a node j if one of the following four conditions is met: 1) the
maximum SoC an EV can have upon departure from j is strictly less than the energy needed to reach to the
nearest CS according to the energy consumption, or is less than the SoC it could have attained by traveling on
the route to j without visiting any CS. Specifically, the difference between the maximum of the SoC function
and the energy consumed eij is strictly smaller than maxt min tejl u, Q  Ð
                                                                          eÝj u; 2) The sum of the minimum
                                                              P Y0
                                                              l F
duration associated with the SoC function at the current label (i.e., the x-coordinate of the first supporting
                                    Ñ
                                    Ý
point), the driving time tij , and tj is larger than the duration limit Tmax ; 3) If j is a CS node, then while
scanning the nodes of the route backward we encounter the same node j without having scanned before the
depot, a customer, or a CS with a faster technology; 4) If j is a CS node, the value of the inverse of the SoC
function evaluated in Ý
                      Ñ
                      ej is less than the sum of the minimum time associated with the current label and the
time increase due to the detour to j.
   Finally, to avoid enumerating all the RPs from i to j, we use the dominance criterion introduced in Definition
4.1 (for a SoC upon departing to the depot equal to Q) to discard dominated RPs throughout the algorithm.


5.4    A heuristic algorithm for the FRVCP
The goal of this section is to design an effective and efficient heuristic algorithm, which could be periodically
called inside a local search algorithm. Such an algorithm would prevent the search from ignoring regions of the
search space that are feasible with respect to route duration constraints. The algorithm borrows some ideas
from the FRVCP heuristic of Montoya et al. (2017). We describe the general framework of our heuristic in
Algorithm 2. We refer the reader to E.2 for the algorithmic details on the different procedures of the heuristic.
We note that this heuristic inserts CSs into Π.
   Throughout the algorithm, we compute the SoC Y pΠ, iq of the EV upon arrival at node i P Π assuming the
following heuristic (H) charging policy: at each CS, the EV is charged in such a way that its departure SoC is
equal to the minimum between the battery capacity Q and the energy required to reach the next depot or CS
in Π. We then define the energy deficit at node i as maxt0, Y pΠ, iqu.


                                                        20
      The algorithm starts with procedure locateCS1() that scans the nodes in the route (see Algorithm 4). If
the arc connecting two successive nodes does not exist (this rarely happens but it requires special attention),
then the algorithm tries to insert a CS between these nodes by calling procedure insertCS() (see Algorithm
5). Inserting a CS between two nodes follows the same scheme throughout the algorithm. We evaluate the
insertion of each CS by calling function getLBTime() which computes a lower bound on the duration to travel
the resulting route. The lower bound value is the sum of two components: the driving time and a lower bound
on the time to charge the energy deficit observed upon arrival at CSs and at the return to the depot. This
latter bound is computed by dividing the energy deficit by the fastest charging rate of the instance. The
                                                                                                            °
energy deficit, computed using function getEnergyDeficit(), is equal to                                        P XpF Yt0uq maxt0, Y pΠ, iqu. We
                                                                                                                i Π
retain the insertion that leads to the minimum lower bound value. We forbid any insertion if after executing
it the energy deficit computed at the inserted CS and at the next CS that is part of the route, if any, or the
depot is larger than 0. Note that it may happen that the algorithm selects an insertion leading to an energy
infeasible route rather than an insertion leading to an energy-feasible route. Throughout the execution of the
algorithm, we therefore store the energy-feasible route with the minimum duration, assuming the H charging
policy, returned by function getTime().
      Whenever there exists an arc between each pair of successive nodes, we try to insert additional CSs by
calling procedure locateCS2() (see Algorithm 6). Here, we iteratively test the insertion of a CS between two
successive nodes in the current route and we proceed to the insertion yielding the minimum lower bound on
the duration to travel the route. We try to insert additional CSs until we cannot improve the duration of the
current route. Specifically, this procedure terminates when the lower bound on the duration of the current
route is larger than or equal to the duration of the best energy-feasible route.
      We then consider the best energy-feasible route computed during the previous steps of the algorithm.
Calling procedure defineChargingAmount() (see Algorithm 7), we check whether it is possible to transfer
some charge between the CSs of the route. Indeed, it may be profitable in some cases to charge at a CS more
than the energy required to reach the next CS. To this end, we scan the CSs starting by the end of the route,
and we try to transfer some energy from a CS to the CS that precedes it. A transfer of energy reduces the
duration of the route if the slope of the charging function associated with the departure SoC of the EV at the
previous CS is larger than the slope of the charging function associated with the arrival SoC of the EV at the
current CS. Finally, we check whether the maximum-duration limit is exceeded by the optimized route.

     Algorithm 2: ProcedureFRVCP(Π0 )
      input : A route Π0         tπp0q, πp1q,    , πpiq,    , πpj q,    , πpnpΠq  1q, πpnpΠqqu
      output: A couple (f, Π) where the route Π is an energy-feasible route whose duration does not exceed the duration limit
                  Tmax if boolean f is equal to true, or the initial route Π0 if boolean f is equal to false
 1    Apply preprocessing rules on the multigraph induced by Π and F
 2    pf, Π, Πbest q Ð locateCS1(Π0 )
 3    if f  true ^ getLBTime(Π)¤ Tmax then
 4         Πbest Ð locateCS2(Π,Πbest )
 5         if Πbest  null then
 6             (f, Πbest ) Ð reviseChargingAmount(Πbest )
 7             if ftrue then
 8                      return (true, Πbest )
 9                end
10          end
11    end
12    return (false, Π0 )




                                                                              21
6       Computational experiments
We used Gurobi 7.5.0 (through its Java API) to solve the MILP models. All tests were performed on a single
thread with 12 GB and on a cluster of 27 computers, each having 12 cores and two Intel(R) Xeon X5675 3.07
GHz processors. In all the tables, the CPU time is rounded to the nearest integer.
    The first aim of our computational experiments is to assess and compare the performance of the CS
replication-based and the path-based models, which are presented in Sections 3 and 4, for solving small size
instances to the E-VRP-NL. These results are presented in §6.1. The second aim of our computational ex-
periments is to assess the quality of the algorithms developed in Section 5 for the FRVCP. These results are
presented in §6.2.


6.1     Results for E-VRP-NL formulations
For the E-VRP-NL we considered the twenty 10-customer and the twenty 20-customer instances of the Mon-
toya et al. (2017) testbed (publicly available at http://vrp-rep.org). In these instances, both the energy
consumption and travel times are obtained by multiplying the arc length by constant factors (consumption per
unit distance and speed). It is worth noting that none of our results relies on the assumption that the energy
consumption linearly depends on the travel time (this is only a characteristic of the instances). We ran the
MILP models with a three-hour time limit.

6.1.1     CS replication-based models

                                                    ode s and rFArc
We first tested the CS replication-based models rFNCS                  s presented in Section 3. The number
                                                      rep       CS rep

of copies of each CS i P F was set to an integer value β ¥ 1 (i.e., βi  β, @i P F ).
    Table 1 reports for each model and each value of β the number of instances proven infeasible by the solver
within the time limit (#Inf), the number of instances reaching the time limit without finding any feasible
solution (#Unk), the number of instances with a feasible solution not proven to be optimal (#Opt), the
number of instances with a feasible solution proven to be optimal (#Opt), the average CPU time in seconds
(Time (s)) for the instances in (#Opt), and the average gap (Gap) for the instances in (#Opt). We compute
the gap as pz  z LB q{z, where z is the objective function value of the best integer solution returned by the
solver, and z LB is the best lower bound retrieved by the solver running the corresponding model. The detailed
results for all the tested instances are reported in F.
    We first observe that for small values of β the rFArc
                                                      CS rep
                                                             s model cannot always prove the infeasibility of some
instances. This may be due to the relatively large number of variables it contains (around twice as many as
the rFNCS
        ode s model for the tested instances). Second, the results confirm that the value of β influences the
          rep

feasibility of the instances. Since we do not know any procedure for fixing β, while guaranteeing optimality,
we can only compare models for identical values of β. The best results are obtained with arc-based tracking
constraints for which the number of optimal solutions is larger and the solution time is significantly reduced,
compared to node-based tracking. Moreover, when the time limit is reached, the best solution returned by the
arc-based models has a better quality. Finally, our results illustrate the difficulty of optimally solving even
small instances with the CS replication-based models.
    Proposition 3.1 demonstrates that the LP relaxation value of rFArc
                                                                   CS rep
                                                                          s can never be less than that of
rFNCSoderep s. In our experiments, we computed the average relative gap between the linear relaxation value and
the best lower bound provided by the linear relaxation of any of the formulations. The models with arc-based
                                                                                                           LB
tracking variables yields tighter bounds than those with node-based tracking variables. Specifically, let zArc and
   ode correspond to the average LP relaxation of rFArc    s and rFNCSoderep s. We observe that pzArc  zNLBode q{zArc
 LB                                                 CS rep                                        LB               LB
zN
is approximately 57%. This seems to explain why the solver yields a better performance running on arc-based
models.


                                                          22
Table 1: Detailed computational results for the CS replication-based models on the 10-customer and 20-
customer instances

                       |I |   β     Model           #Inf   #Unk    #Opt   #Opt       Time (s)   Gap
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s     10      0       0     10              5        -
                              1
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s     10      0       0     10           252         -
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      5      0       0     15           433         -
                              2
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      5      0       4     11           699    31.8%
                       10
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      0      0       0     20           821         -
                              3
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      0      0       8     12          1289    32.6%
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      0      0       4     16           215    14.4%
                              4
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      0      0      11      9          1423    34.0%
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      8      1       5      6           632    16.4%
                              1
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      3      6      11      0          1274    24.8%
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      2      4       8      6          1323     8.8%
                              2
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      1      5      13      1          5663    24.0%
                       20
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      2      3      10      5          2233     9.8%
                              3
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      0      5      14      1          8706    28.9%
                                    rCS rep
                                    FArc        s      0      5      10      5          1200    10.9%
                              4
                                    rCS rep
                                    FN ode      s      0      5      15      0              -   27.0%



6.1.2   Path-based model

We also tested the path-based model rFArc
                                      P ath
                                            s presented in Section 4. We first assessed the impact of the
dominance rule described in §4.2. Applying this rule reduces the average number of paths by a factor of two
for the 10-customer instances (on average 647 paths were generated without the dominance rule versus 270
with it), and by a factor of five for the 20-customer instances (on average 6512 paths were generated without
the dominance rule versus 1314 with it). This leads to more tractable instances: the average number of
paths between each couple of non-CS nodes is approximately 2.4 and 3.2 for the 10-customer and 20-customer
instances, respectively. Table 2 reports the same measures as in Table 1 for the path-based model. See F for
the detailed results for each instance.

  Table 2: Computational results for the path-based model on the 10-customer and 20-customer instances

                                  |I |   #Inf       #Unk   #Opt    #Opt   Time (s)       Gap
                                  10        0          0      0      20       229           -
                                  20        0          0     15       5       489      14.0%


   Our results show that the MILP solver can optimally solve all the 10-customer instances within an average
time of seven minutes. The solver fails to solve most of the instances with 20 customers due to the large size
of the models. Doubling the number of customers from 10 to 20 multiplies the number of paths by five (from
270 to 1314, on average).

   Figure 5 compares the CS replication-based and path-based models. Specifically, the figure shows the
number of instances optimally solved according to the solution time for the different models. We conclude that
the MILP solver performs better on the path-based model than on the CS replication-based models. Moreover,
we recall that using the path-based model ensures that optimal solutions are not cut off.


6.2     Results for FRVCP algorithms
Since the FRVCP problem is typically solved within local search algorithms, we wanted to compare the speed
of the algorithms we developed and the quality of the routes they provide. We tested the three algorithms
described in Section 5 to solve the FRVCP: our formulation rF RP ath pΠqs with the MILP solver, our labeling
algorithm, and our heuristic (referred to as MILP PATH, LABEL, and HEURISTIC). As a basis of comparison,


                                                              23
                        20                                                                                                       20
                                                                                   rFArc
                                                                                      CS rep
                                                                                               s (β  3)
                                                                                   rFNCSoderep s (β  3)

  Number of instances                                                                                      Number of instances
                                                                                   rFArc
                                                                                      CS rep
                                                                                               s (β  4)
                                                                                   rFNCSoderep s (β  4)
                                                                                         rFArc
                                                                                             P ath s
                        10                                                                                                       10

   optimally solved                                                                                         optimally solved




                         0                                                                                                        0
                             0     1800    3600    5400      7200   9000   10800                                                      0     1800   3600    5400      7200   9000   10800
                                                  Time (s)                                                                                                Time (s)

                                 (a) 10-customer instances                                                                                (b) 20-customer instances

                                          Figure 5: Performance charts of the different models on small size instances


we also implemented the FRVCP heuristic of Montoya et al. (2017) (referred to as HEURISTIC M2017).
Moreover, in order to assess the relevance of considering the insertion of multiple CSs between each pair of
non-CS nodes of the initial route, we also solved the FRVCP-1. To this end, we adapted our path-based MILP
formulation by only considering paths with at most one CS. We also adapted the graph on which we applied
our labeling algorithm. These modifications yield a new MILP model and a new labeling algorithm (referred
to as MILP PATH 1 and LABEL 1) for this special version of the FRVCP. We also implemented the FRVCP
formulation of Montoya et al. (2017) (referred to as MILP M2017). No computational time limit was imposed
on these tests.
       We first tested the algorithms on the pool of routes used by Montoya et al. (2017) in the second phase of
their metaheuristic. This pool consists of all routes encountered at each local optima solution found by an
iterated local search procedure. The pool contains a total of 29,443 routes having between 3 and 15 nodes,
which may visit between 2 and 24 CSs. For each algorithm, in Table 3 we report the number of routes for which
the duration is below the duration limit Tmax (#Feas), the number of routes solved to optimality (#Opt), the
average CPU time in milliseconds (Time (ms)), the average gap (Gap), and the maximum observed gap over
all routes (Gap max).
       Considering the detailed results presented in F.2 and F.3, we conclude that for all algorithms the number
of CSs and the number of nodes have a relatively small impact on the solution time and quality. We note that
the two exact algorithms for the FRVCP, i.e., MILP PATH and LABEL, were able to solve all 29,443 routes to
optimality within an average runtime of less than 100 milliseconds. LABEL is more than 90 times faster than
MILP PATH. HEURISTIC produces competitive results with a small average gap in a very short time. It also
outperforms HEURISTIC M2017 in terms of gap. However, both heuristics may fail to find existing feasible
solutions. Such failures are due to the fact that feasibility often coincides with optimality. Since our heuristic
found many more optimal solutions, compared to the FRVCP heuristic of Montoya et al. (2017), it found
more feasible solutions. In particular, HEURISTIC failed to produce a feasible solution in 2.1% of the routes,
whereas the HEURISTIC M2017 failed to produce a feasible solution in 13.7% of the routes. Although LABEL
outperforms HEURISTIC, the latter is easier to implement than the former which can make it attractive for
some applications.
       We observe that MILP PATH 1 solves FRVCP-1 much faster than MILP M2017. However, LABEL 1
substantially outperforms both of these formulations. Comparing FRVCP with FRVCP-1, we notice that
restricting the insertion of at most one CS between any pair of non-CS nodes does not impact the quality of
the solutions in most cases. Specifically, for 28,085 out of the 29,443 routes, the optimal objective function
value considering either the FRVCP or the FRVCP-1 are the same. However, for the remaining 1358 routes,
the charging decisions obtained by solving the FRVCP-1 are not optimal and in the worst case they can be
quite far from the optimal ones. Specifically, let z  and z1 correspond to the average optimal objective function


                                                                                        24
value obtained when solving the FRVCP and the FRVCP-1 on these 1358 routes. We observe that pz1  z  q{z1
is approximately 0.01%. However, in the worst case (i.e., for a particular route), the deviation between the two
optimal objective function values is 7.68%.

                   Table 3: Computational results for the different algorithms on 29,443 routes

                                 FRVCP                                                        FRVCP-1
 Algorithm             #Feas    #Opt     Time (ms)      Gap    Gap max     Algorithm          #Feas     #Opt     Time (ms)
 MILP PATH             29,443   29,443        96.7   0.00%       0.00%     MILP PATH 1        29,443    29,443         30.1
 LABEL                 29,443   29,443         1.0   0.00%       0.00%     LABEL 1            29,443    29,443          0.6
 HEURISTIC             28,815   23,792         0.2   0.19%      14.00%     MILP M2017         29,443    29,443         55.0
 HEURISTIC M2017       25,398   19,104         0.2   0.83%      36.32%


   We also tested our labeling algorithm of §5.3 on the 1426 routes making up the best solutions reported
by Montoya et al. (2017) for 120 instances with 10, 20, 40, 80, 160, or 320 customers (20 instances for each
instance size). We recall that the charging decisions for these routes were found using the FRVCP formulation
of Montoya et al. (2017), which assumes at most one CS visit between two successive non-CS nodes. Therefore,
we want to assess if the results can be improved by solving the more general version of the FRVCP, which
allows multiple consecutive visits to CSs. We report in Table 4 the name of the instances for which a better
solution has been identified, the number of routes (#R ) for which the charging decisions have been revised
over the number of routes (#R) in the initial solution. We show the maximum gap improvement between a
route that has been revised and the initial route (Max Gap R ). We also report the average gap with respect
to the previous best known solution (Gap). We found 23 new best E-VRP-NL solutions. On these instances,
taking optimal charging decisions improved the solutions of Montoya et al. (2017) by approximately 0.09%.
This shows that charging decisions are critical in the E-VRP-NL. Therefore, there is ground to believe that the
use of the labeling algorithm inside a metaheuristic algorithm deserves further study.

Table 4: E-VRP-NL solutions of (Montoya et al., 2017) improved by applying the labeling algorithm on each
route

   Instance        #R /#R      Max Gap R    Gap               Instance        #R /#R        Max Gap R        Gap
   tc0c40s8cf0           2/7         -4.48%   -0.765%           tc1c160s24cf3          1/17            -1.03%     -0.066%
   tc2c40s5cf2           1/6         -0.20%   -0.024%           tc1c320s24cf2          2/36            -1.00%     -0.045%
   tc2c40s8cf2           1/6         -0.20%   -0.025%           tc1c320s24cf3          1/30            -0.46%     -0.011%
   tc0c80s8cf1          1/10         -0.03%   -0.003%           tc1c320s38cf2          1/33            -0.34%     -0.008%
   tc1c80s12cf2          1/8         -0.24%   -0.038%           tc1c320s38ct3          1/30            -0.31%     -0.008%
   tc2c80s8cf4          1/10         -1.86%   -0.235%           tc2c320s24cf0          1/38            -0.01%    -0.0004%
   tc2c80s8ct3           1/9         -0.08%   -0.009%           tc2c320s24ct4          1/32            -2.57%     -0.096%
   tc0c160s16cf4        3/18         -0.43%   -0.074%           tc2c320s38cf4          1/32            -0.19%     -0.006%
   tc0c160s16ct4        3/18         -0.31%   -0.052%           tc2c320s38ct0          2/41            -0.31%     -0.006%
   tc0c160s24cf4        3/18         -0.44%   -0.076%           tc2c320s38ct1          1/28            -0.02%     -0.001%
   tc0c160s24ct4        4/18         -3.37%   -0.197%           tc2c320s38ct4          1/32            -0.09%     -0.004%
   tc1c160s16cf3        1/17         -5.64%   -0.347%


   The results presented in this section open an interesting research avenue. The only way to obtain an exact
evaluation of a move in local search algorithms for the E-VRP-NL is to re-optimize the charging decisions
(i.e., where and how much to charge) for the route(s) involved in the move. Specifically, one must decide the
charging decisions such that each route has the lowest possible cost. This is a daunting task because it implies
solving one (inter route moves) or more (intra route moves) FRVCPs. As Montoya et al. (2017) pointed out,
exactly evaluating the moves using MILPs is intractable (our findings only confirm their observation). For this
reason, most existing approaches use fast-to-compute proxy move evaluations. As a matter of fact, only the
most sophisticated approaches use MILPs or exact algorithms at certain points (e.g., every time they reach a


                                                          25
local optimum) to improve the charging decisions. A notable exception is the multi-start local search heuristic
proposed by Andelmin and Bartolini (2016) for the Green VRP. This heuristic works on a multigraph (where
each arc represents a refuel path) avoiding the need to explicitly consider charging stations. Our results suggest
that because of its good computational performance, our labeling algorithm may be used to exactly evaluate a
large number of moves (if not all) in local search algorithms without penalizing the overall performance of the
method.



7      Conclusions
We have compared three MILP formulations for the electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging
function (E-VRP-NL), two of which are new. The first formulation was proposed by Montoya et al. (2017),
where tracking the time and the SoC of each route was achieved through the use of node-based variables. We
have first proposed a new formulation that uses arc-based tracking variables. Computational experiments have
shown that this alternative tracking strategy drastically improves the results. This can be explained by the fact
that the arc-based formulation had a much tighter LP relaxation gap, compared to the node-based formulation.
Most of the available E-VRP models, as well as the arc-based formulation, are based on pre-setting the number
of CS copies. We have demonstrated that generating a limited number of copies compromises the quality of the
solution by possibly eliminating optimal solutions or by yielding an infeasible model. With more copies, the
models become larger and more difficult to solve, even for small-size instances. To overcome these drawbacks,
we have proposed a third formulation for the E-VRP-NL based on the concept of CSPs between non-CS nodes.
Using dominance rules to discard unpromising paths, we have shown through our computational experiments
that this third formulation systematically yields better results than the first two formulations. All 10-customer
instances could be solved to optimality within a much shorter time. As expected, solving our models using
a commercial solver allows us to solve only small-size instances. However, most E-VRPs have been handled
by node-based formulations, and for these cases the arc-based model provides a highly relevant alternative
formulation. Furthermore, the introduction of the path-based model provides a new promising avenue for the
development of exact and heuristic algorithms for the E-VRP-NL.
     Building on the formulations we have developed for the E-VRP-NL, we have also introduced heuristic and
exact algorithms to solve the fixed route vehicle charging problem (FRVCP). Given an initial energy infeasible
route, this problem consists in finding the charging decisions that minimize the total duration of the route. We
have proposed a new MILP formulation, an exact labeling algorithm, and a heuristic algorithm. Computational
experiments have shown that taking optimal or near-optimal charging decisions is crucial in producing high
quality E-VRP-NL solutions. Indeed, we have improved 23 out of 120 best known E-VRP-NL solutions by
allowing the visit of multiple CSs between two non-CS nodes. Since the labeling algorithm is able to optimally
solve the FRVCP within a very short time, it can be easily embedded in future E-VRP-NL heuristics.



References
Andelmin, J. (2014). Electric vehicle routing with realistic recharging models. Master’s thesis, - Department
    of Mathematics and Systems Analysis, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland.

Andelmin, J. and Bartolini, E. (2016). A multi-start local search heuristic for the green vehicle routing problem
    based on a multigraph reformulation. Working paper available at http://sal.aalto.fi/files/personnel/
    enrico.bartolini/green_heuristic_draft.pdf.

Ascheuer, N., Fischetti, M., and Grötschel, M. (2001). Solving the Asymmetric Travelling Salesman Problem
    with time windows by branch-and-cut. Mathematical Programming, 90(3):475–506.


                                                       26
Bartolini, E. and Andelmin, J. (2017). An exact algorithm for the green vehicle routing problem. Transportation
  Science, 51(4):1288–1303.

Desaulniers, G., Errico, F., Irnich, S., and Schneider, M. (2016). Exact Algorithms for Electric Vehicle-Routing
  Problems with Time Windows. Operations Research, 64(6):1388–1405.

Erdoğan, S. and Miller-Hooks, E. (2012). A green vehicle routing problem. Transportation Research Part E:
  Logistics and Transportation Review, 48(1):100–114.

Felipe, A., Ortuo, M., Righini, G., and Tirado, G. (2014). A heuristic approach for the green vehicle routing
  problem with multiple technologies and partial recharges. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
  Transportation Review, 71:111 – 128.

Hiermann, G., Hartl, R. F., Puchinger, J., and Vidal, T. (2018). Routing a mix of conventional, plug-in hybrid,
  and electric vehicles. European Journal of Operational Research.

Hiermann, G., Puchinger, J., Ropke, S., and Hartl, R. F. (2016). The electric fleet size and mix vehicle routing
  problem with time windows and recharging stations. European Journal of Operational Research, 252(3):995
  –1018.

Koç, Ç. and Karaoglan, I. (2016). The green vehicle routing problem: A heuristic based exact solution approach.
  Applied Soft Computing, 39:154 – 164.

Kullman, N., Goodson, J., and Mendoza, J. E. (2018). Dynamic Electric Vehicle Routing with Mid-route
  Recharging and Uncertain Availability. In ODYSSEUS 2018 - Seventh International Workshop on Freight
  Transportation and Logistics, Cagliari, Italy.

Leggieri, V. and Haourari, M. (2017). A practical solution approach for the green vehicle routing problem.
  Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 104:97–112.

Lozano, L. and Medaglia, A. L. (2013). On an exact method for the constrained shortest path problem.
  Computers & Operations Research, 40(1):378–384.

Montoya, A. (2016). Electric Vehicle Routing Problems: models and solution approaches. PhD thesis, Université
  dAngers, France.

Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J. E., and Villegas, J. G. (2016). A multi-space sampling heuristic for the
  green vehicle routing problem. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 70:113–128.

Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J. E., and Villegas, J. G. (2017). The electric vehicle routing problem with
  nonlinear charging function. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 103:87 – 110.

Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., Laporte, G., and Veneroni, M. (2017). Battery degradation and behaviour for electric
  vehicles: Review and numerical analyses of several models. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
  103:158 – 187.

Roberti, R. and Wen, M. (2016). The electric traveling salesman problem with time windows. Transportation
  Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 89:32–52.

Schiffer, M. (2017). Logistics Networks with Intermediate Stops: Designing Innovative and Green Solutions.
  PhD thesis, Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule Aachen.

Schiffer, M. and Walther, G. (2017). An adaptive large neighborhood search for the location-routing problem
  with intra-route facilities. Transportation Science, 52(2):331–352.


                                                       27
Schneider, M., Stenger, A., and Goeke, D. (2014). The electric vehicle-routing problem with time windows and
  recharging stations. Transportation Science, 48(4):500–520.

Sweda, T. M., Dolinskaya, I. S., and Klabjan, D. (2017). Adaptive routing and recharging policies for electric
  vehicles. Transportation Science, 51(4):1326–1348.

Zündorf, T. (2014). Electric vehicle routing with realistic recharging models. Master’s thesis, Karlsruhe Institute
  of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.




                                                        28
A     Graph preprocessing
Some arcs from the arc set A can be removed without cutting off the optimal solution. Specifically, we introduce
the following preprocessing steps to reduce the size of the arc set:

  1. Considering i, j P V , if minlPF Yt0u teli u     eij    minlPF Yt0u teil u ¡ Q then we infer that the maximum
     possible SoC at i the EV is not sufficient for traversing arc pi, j q and reaching the nearest CS or the
     depot. Therefore, such an arc is removed from A.

  2. Let tij be the duration of a shortest path from i to j in G (after applying preprocessing rule 1) with
     respect to arc duration tij . Let ecmin
                                         ij  be the minimum charging amount necessary to build a route
     traversing arc pi, j q. Then ecmin
                                    ij   maxt0, pe0i        eij     ej0 q  Qu. We also define tcharge
                                                                                                 ij     as a lower bound
     on the charging time necessary to perform a route traversing the arc pi, j q. Namely, tcharge
                                                                                            ij     is equal to 0
     if ecmin
          ij   0. Otherwise, tcharge
                               ij     is equal to

                                                  $      $                                        ,,
                                                  '
                                                  '
                                                  '
                                                  &
                                                         '
                                                         '
                                                         '  ecmin
                                                         &  ij
                                                                          e0l      eli e0i {ρ , /
                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                  ./
                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                    .
                                   tcharge    min   min    ecmin         eil                 
                                                                                  elj  eij {ρ ,
                                    ij         lPF '     '  ij                                   / /
                                                  '
                                                  '
                                                  %
                                                         '
                                                         '
                                                         %   ecmin        ejl     el0  ej0 {ρ --
                                                                                                  //
                                                                                                  / /
                                                               ij



     The value of ρ corresponds to the steepest slope for a segment of the piecewise linear approximation of
     the charging functions (i.e., ρ  maxlPF tρl1 u). Using this parameter, we compute tcharge
                                                                                          ij     by exploring
     the three mutually exclusive detour options. If t0i          tij         tj0     tcharge
                                                                                          ij     ¡ Tmax , we remove the arc pi, j q
     from set A, since traversing the arc pi, j q leads to a violation of the route maximum-duration limit.

  3. We also remove all the arcs between CS copies of the same CS. More specifically, for every i P F and
     j, l P Fi1 , we remove the arc pj, lq from set A.




                                                             29
B      Proofs
 Proof of Proposition 3.1. Assume that the arc-based tracking constraints are satisfied by setting every vari-
able xij , yij , q j , q j , τij , and ∆j to xij , yij , q j , q j , τij , and ∆j , respectively. We now prove that the node-based
tracking constraints are satisfied if: 1) the variables xij are set to values xij for every pi, j q P A, 2) the vari-
                                                                                                                                   °
ables q j , q j , ∆j are set to values q j , q j , ∆j for every j P F , and 3) the variables yi , τi are set                         pi,lqPA yil and
°
  pi,lqPA τil for every i P V zt0u. We also set the value of τ0 to 0 and the value of y0 to Q.
    • Let pi, j q P A such that j P I. Then,

         – if i P V zt0u,
                                   ¸                   ¸
                     yi  yj              yil                 yjl
                                 pi,lqPA             pj,lqPA
                                   ¸                    ¸
                     yi  yj              yil                 pylj  elj xlj q                                       from constraints (39)
                                 pi,lqPA             pl,j qPA
                                                      ¸                        ¸
                     yi  yj  eij xij                            yil                   pylj  elj xlj q
                                                pi,lqPA:lj               pl,j qPA:li
                                                      ¸
                     yi  yj ¤ eij xij                            yil
                                                pi,lqPA:lj
                                                      ¸
                     yi  yj ¤ eij xij                          pQ  l1 Pmin    tel1 i uqxil                           from constraints (42)
                                                                         F Yt0u
                                                pi,lqPA:lj
                                                        ¸
                     yi  yj ¤ eij xij          Q                   xil
                                                    pi,lqPA:lj
                     yi  yj ¤ eij xij          Qp1  xij q                                                             from constraints (2)

            and
                               ¸                    ¸
                  yi  yj              yil                yjl
                              pi,lqPA           pj,lqPA
                               ¸                    ¸
                  yi  yj              yil                pylj  elj xlj q                                             from constraints (39)
                              pi,lqPA           pl,j qPA
                                                ¸                           ¸                    ¸
                  yi  yj  eij xij                        ylj                        yil                  elj xlj
                                           pl,j qPA:li                 pi,lqPA:lj          pl,j qPA:li
                                                ¸
                  yi  yj ¥ eij xij                        ylj
                                           pl,j qPA:li
                                                ¸
                  yi  yj ¥ eij xij                        pQ  l1 Pmin   tel1 l uqxlj                                  from constraints (42)
                                                                     F Yt0u
                                           pl,j qPA:li
                                                      ¸
                  yi  yj ¥ eij xij  Q                         xlj
                                              pl,j qPA:li
                  yi  yj ¥ eij xij  Qp1  xij q.                                                                        from constraints (2)

         – if i  0,
                                             ¸
                       y0  yj  Q                   yjl
                                           pj,lqPA
                                             ¸
                       y0  yj  Q                   pylj  elj xlj q                                                from constraints (39)
                                           pl,j qPA
                                                                            ¸
                       y0  yj  Q         e0j x0j  y0j                              pylj  elj xlj q
                                                                        pl,j qPA:l0

                                                                             30
                   y0  yj ¤ e0j x0j            Q  Qx0j                                                        from constraints (38)

                   y0  yj ¤ e0j x0j            Qp1  x0j q                                                      from constraints (2)

       and
                                          ¸
                   y0  yj  Q                   yjl
                                       pj,lqPA
                                          ¸
                   y0  yj  Q                   pylj  elj xlj q                                              from constraints (39)
                                       pl,j qPA
                                                           ¸                    ¸
                   y0  yj  Q         e0j x0j                    ylj                     elj xlj
                                                        pl,j qPA            pl,j qPA:l0
                                                              ¸
                   y0  yj ¥ Q         e0j x0j  Q                    xlj                                       from constraints (42)
                                                           pl,j qPA
                   y0  yj ¥ Q         e0j x0j  Q                                                               from constraints (2)

                   y0  yj ¥ e0j x0j

                   y0  yj ¥ e0j x0j  Qp1  x0j q.

  Constraints (5) are therefore satisfied.

• Let pi, j q P A such that j P F 1 . Then,

     – if i P V zt0u,
                               ¸                   ¸
               yi  q j               yil                pylj  elj xlj q                                      from constraints (40)
                             pi,lqPA            pl,j qPA
                                                  ¸                      ¸
               yi  q j  eij xij                          yil                     pylj  elj xlj q
                                            pi,lqPA:lj              pl,j qPA:li
                                                  ¸
               yi  q j ¤ eij xij                          yil
                                            pi,lqPA:lj
                                                    ¸
               yi  q j ¤ eij xij           Q                  xil                                               from constraints (42)
                                                pi,lqPA:lj
               yi  q j ¤ eij xij           Qp1  xij q                                                           from constraints (3)

       and
                           ¸                    ¸
             yi  q j              yil               pylj  elj xlj q                                             from constraints (40)
                          pi,lqPA           pl,j qPA
                                            ¸                         ¸                      ¸
             yi  q j  eij xij                        ylj                    yil                    elj xlj
                                       pl,j qPA:li              pi,lqPA:lj           pl,j qPA:li
                                            ¸
             yi  q j ¥ eij xij                        ylj
                                       pl,j qPA:li
                                                  ¸
             yi  q j ¥ eij xij  Q                        xlj                                                      from constraints (42)
                                          pl,j qPA:li
             yi  q j ¥ eij xij  Qp1  xij q.                                                                       from constraints (3)

     – if i  0,
                                         ¸
                   y0  q j  Q                  pylj  elj xlj q                                              from constraints (40)
                                       pl,j qPA

                                                                         31
                                                                         ¸
                 y0  q j  Q           e0j x0j  y0j                              pylj  elj xlj q
                                                                  pl,j qPA:l0
                 y0  q j ¤ e0j x0j             Q  Qx0j                                                              from constraints (38)

                 y0  q j ¤ e0j x0j             Qp1  x0j q                                                            from constraints (3)

        and
                                              ¸
                  y0  q j  Q                     pylj  elj xlj q                                                  from constraints (40)
                                         pl,j qPA
                                                             ¸                      ¸
                  y0  q j  Q           e0j x0j                     ylj                     elj xlj
                                                           pl,j qPA            pl,j qPA:l0
                                                                ¸
                  y0  q j ¥ Q           e0j x0j  Q                     xlj                                          from constraints (42)
                                                              pl,j qPA
                  y0  q j ¥ Q           e0j x0j  Q                                                                   from constraints (3)

                  y0  q j ¥ e0j x0j

                  y0  q j ¥ e0j x0j  Qp1  x0j q.

  Constraints (6) are therefore satisfied.

• Let i P F 1 , then
                                           ¸
                               yi                 yil
                                        pi,lqPA
                               yi  q i .                                                     from constraints (41)

  Constraints (8) are therefore satisfied.

• Let pi, 0q P A, then
                                           ¸
                               yi                 yil
                                        pi,lqPA
                               yi ¥ yi0

                               yi ¥ ei0 xi0 .                                                 from constraints (49)

  Constraints (7) are therefore satisfied.

• Let pi, j q P A such that j P I. Then,

     – if i P V zt0u,
                          ¸                   ¸
           τj  τi                τjl              τil
                        pj,lqPA            pi,lqPA
                          ¸                                                 ¸
           τj  τi                pτlj ptlj          gj q xlj q                   τil                                     from constraints (43)
                        pl,j qPA                                         pi,lqPA:
                                                      ¸                                                    ¸
           τj  τi  ptij          gj q xij                      pτlj ptlj            gj q xlj q                     τil
                                                  pl,j qPA:li                                          pi,lqPA:lj
                                                      ¸
           τj  τi ¥ ptij          gj q xij                     τil
                                                  pi,lqPA:lj
                                                                ¸
           τj  τi ¥ ptij          gj q xij  Tmax                          xil                                             from constraints (45)
                                                           pi,lqPA:lj
           τj  τi ¥ ptij          gj q xij  Tmax p1  xij q.                                                               from constraints (2)


                                                                            32
     – if i  0,
                              ¸
             τj  τ0                  τjl
                            pj,lqPA
                              ¸
             τj  τ0                  pτlj ptlj            gj q xlj q                                              from constraints (43)
                            pl,j qPA
                                                                      ¸
             τj  τ0  pt0j            gj q x0j        τ0j                       pτlj ptlj          gj q xlj q
                                                                  pl,j qPA:l0
             τj  τ0 ¥ pt0j            gj q x0j

             τj  τ0 ¥ pt0j            gj q x0j  Tmax p1  x0j q.                                                   from constraints (2)

  Constraints (26) are therefore satisfied.

• Let pi, j q P A such that j P F 1 . Then,

     – if i P V zt0u,
                             ¸                    ¸
              τj  τi                 τjl                τil
                           pj,lqPA               pi,lqPA
                              ¸                                              ¸
              τj  τi                 pτlj       tlj xlj q      ∆j                 τil                            from constraints (44)
                           pl,j qPA                                        pi,lqPA
                                                           ¸                                     ¸
              τj  τi  tij xij            ∆j                       pτlj        tlj xlj q                  τil
                                                    pl,j qPA:li                              pi,lqPA:lj
                                                           ¸
              τj  τi ¥ tij xij            ∆j                      τil
                                                    pi,lqPA:lj
                                                                   ¸
              τj  τi ¥ tij xij            ∆j  Tmax                         xil                                    from constraints (45)
                                                              pi,lqPA:lj
              τj  τi ¥ tij xij            ∆j  Tmax p1  xij q                                                      from constraints (2)

              τj  τi ¥ tij xij            ∆j  pTmax              Smax qp1  xij q.

     – if i  0,
                                  ¸
                   τj  τ0                τjl
                               pj,lqPA
                                  ¸
                   τj  τ0                pτlj       tlj xlj q      ∆j                                           from constraints (44)
                               pl,j qPA
                                                                          ¸
                   τj  τ0  t0j x0j             ∆j        τ0j                       pτlj     tlj xlj q
                                                                    pl,j qPA:l0
                   τj  τ0 ¥ tij x0j             ∆j

                   τj  τ0 ¥ tij x0j             ∆j  pTmax               Smax qp1  x0j q.

  Constraints (27) are therefore satisfied.

• Let j P V zt0u. Then, if j P I,
                            ¸
            τj     tj0              τjl      tj0
                           pj,lqPA
                            ¸
            τj     tj0 ¤             pTmax  tjl  pl  tl0 q xjl                    tj0
                           pj,lqPA

                                                                           33
                                       ¸
                     τj    tj0 ¤             pTmax  tjl  tl0 q xjl                tj0                    from the triangular inequality
                                   pj,lqPA
                                       ¸
                     τj    tj0 ¤             pTmax  tj0 q xjl                tj0
                                   pj,lqPA
                     τj    tj0 ¤ Tmax  tj0             tj0                                                                from constraints (2)

                     τj    tj0 ¤ Tmax

      and if j P F 1 ,
                                       ¸
                    τj    tj0              τjl   tj0
                                  pj,lqPA
                                       ¸                                            
                    τj    tj0 ¤              Tmax  tjl  tl0  ∆min
                                                                 j   xjl                     tj0
                                  pj,lqPA
                                       ¸
                    τj    tj0 ¤             pTmax  tj0 q xjl              tj0                                     from the triangular inequality
                                  pj,lqPA
                    τj    tj0 ¤ Tmax  tj0            tj0                                                                   from constraints (2)

                    τj    tj0 ¤ Tmax .

   Constraints (28) are therefore satisfied. By definition of the values τ̄j , constraints (29) and (30) are also
satisfied. The non-negativity constraints (33) are satisfied. Hence all the node-based tracking constraints are
satisfied.

 Proof of Lemma 4.1. Let us now consider a RP pp, φq containing at least one CS. If the SoC of the EV upon
departing from the origin is equal to q 1 rather than q ¤ q 1 , then the EV arrives at the first CS µp p0q with a
SoC equal to q 1  eoppq,µ p0q rather than q  eoppq,µ p0q . The inverse of the SoC function InvSoCqpp,φq includes
                                   p                                           p

the time charging the EV from q  eoppq,µ p0q up to φp0q, which is larger than or equal to q 1  eoppq,µ p0q . Since
                                                              p                                                                               p

the EV arrives with a larger SoC at µp p0q when starting with a SoC equal to q 1 , the time spent by the EV to
reach a given SoC is reduced by the time spent at µp p0q charging the EV from q  eoppq,µ p0q to q 1  eoppq,µ p0q .               p                p

This time is equal to λpqq1  Φ         1                   1
                                 µ p0q pq  eoppq,µ p0q q  Φµ p0q pq  eoppq,µ p0q q. The inverse of the SoC function
                                  1
                                                                       p                                       p
        1                                     p                                          p

InvSoCqpp,φq can therefore be built from the function InvSoCqpp,φq by subtracting λpqq1 from the time needed to
reach a given SoC. For a SoC that is smaller than the minimum SoC that can be reached at the destination,
the time is consistently set (according to the definition of the inverse of the SoC function) to the time needed
to reach that minimum.
   Now consider a RP pp, φq that does not contain any CS. The inverse of the SoC function is equal to tp if
the SoC q̃ is less than or equal to the SoC of the EV upon arriving at the destination dppq. Otherwise, the EV
can never reached this SoC and therefore the value of the SoC function is set to 8.

 Proof of Proposition 4.1.

   Case 1: If np1  0 or Θpp1 ,φ1 q ¥ Θpp2 ,φ2 q , we have to consider two cases: np1 ¡ 0 and np1  0 (note that
np2 ¡ 0 since we never check the dominance of a RP that does not contain any CS).

   • Case 1.1: np1 ¡ 0 (q1  eopp1 q,µp1 p0q and q2  eopp2 q,µp2 p0q )
                                                                  pp1 ,φ1 q                        pp1 ,φ1 q
      First, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                         ,φ q
                                              , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                  2     2

      have:
        pp1 ,φ1 q
      T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q


                                                                                    34
 ñ         max             tInvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃qu ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                                    1                                                             2

   P pp2 ,φ2 q p q                                      1    1                                                        2       2                               p1                              p1                            p2                           p2
     q̃ Ωpp1 ,φ1 q q


 ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq,                 InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃ q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ q ¤ Φ                           1
                                                                                                     µp p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q  Φµp p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                             2


 ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq,                 InvSoCqp11 ,φ1           p                   q   pq̃q  Φ1           µp1 0   p q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q ¤                            InvSoCqp22 ,φ2    p           q   pq̃q  Φ1         µp2 0    p q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
 ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq,                 InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q                                                                        from lemma 4.1

 ñ @q̃ P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s,                1           2                        2
                                                                                                          2   2
                                                                                                                                  InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q                                                                                   (115)

                                                                                                      pp1 ,φ1 q                                                        pp ,φ q
Second, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                    ,φ q
                                         , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 q                                                                                                                   ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                                             2       2

have:

  pp ,φ q
T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q                ∆p1 p q q  ∆p2 p q q

 ñ         min         tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃qu                                                                             Φ                           1
                                                                                                                                                      µp p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q  Φµp p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
                                                                                                                                                       1
          pp1 ,φ1 q
     q̃ PΩpp ,φ q pq q                                                                                                                                         1                                                             2
            2 2


 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2
                                                                             1
                                                                                 1       1
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                            2       2                            p1                                p1                          p2                       p2


 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2
                                                                             1
                                                                                 1       1                                p1                                      p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2       2                           p2                       p2


 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2                                                 1       1                                                  2        2


 ñ Dq̃1 P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q
                                                                 1               2                    2
                                                                                                          2       2
                                                                                                                       (116)                                  1    1                                           2       2



                                                                                                                              pp1 ,φ1 q                                                                                                   pp ,φ q
Let q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                ,φ q
                     , mintep1 , ep2 us be such that T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q and T pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 q
                   2       2

∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q. Equation (115) is equivalent to @q̃ P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q
and Equation (116) is equivalent to Dq̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q                                                                                                                 InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. This means
that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                                                            pp1 ,φ1 q                                                                                pp1 ,φ1 q                                     pp1 ,φ1 q
Let q P rmintep1 , ep2 u, Qpp2 ,φ2 q s be such that maxtT pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu ¤ ∆p1 pq q 
                                       pp ,φ q
∆p2 pq q and mintT pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu
                                                                                             pp ,φ q                                                         ∆p1 pq q ∆p2 pq q. We consider the two following
subcases:

1. If q is such that mintep1 , ep2 u                                                         q ¤ maxtep1 , ep2 u, then

     – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then

           pp1 ,φ1 q
        U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

         ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                   1
                                       1    1
                                                                     1                                        2
                                                                                                                  2       2                              p1                              p1                            p2                           p2


         ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                   1
                                       1    1
                                                                     1
                                                                                                 p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                     2   2                             p2                           p2


         ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                                1                                    1
                                                                                         1       1
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                p1                               p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2   2                        p2             p2


         ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                                1
                                                                                         1       1                                              2        2



        Since Equation (115) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
        r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                   2       2
                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                              ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

           pp ,φ q
        U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q                        ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

         ñ                                                         1                       1
                        q pq  e q  InvSoCpp ,φ q pq  e q Φµ p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              InvSoCqp11 ,φ1    p               q           p
                 p
                                                                     1                                        2                                 1
                                                                                                                  2       2                                             p1                             p1                            p2                            p2


         ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                   1
                                       1    1
                                                                     1
                                                                                                 p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                     2   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     p2                            p2




                                                                                                                                  35
        ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                              1                         1
                                                                            1        1
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                   p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2       2                      p2             p2


        ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                              1
                                                                            1        1
                                                                                                                   (117)               2       2



       Since either Equation (116) or Equation (117) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that
       InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q                    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
    – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then
          pp1 ,φ1 q
       U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

        ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                              1
                                  1       1
                                                        2                                       2
                                                                                                    2        2
                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                               p1                          p1                               p2                             p2


        ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                              1
                                  1       1
                                                        2
                                                                                p1                                        p1
                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                            2    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p2                             p2


        ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                              2                      1
                                                                         1          1                                p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      p2             p2


        ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                              2
                                                                         1          1                                              2       2



       Since Equation (115) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
       r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                  2       2
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                      ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

          pp ,φ q
       U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q                  ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

        ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                              1
                                  1       1
                                                                                2
                                                                                    2       2
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                           p1                                    p1                         p2                              p2


        ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                              1
                                  1       1                 p1                                          p1
                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                           2        2
                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                            p2                              p2


        ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                              2                         1
                                                                            1        1                                p1                                   p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p2             p2


        ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                              2
                                                                            1        1
                                                                                                                   (118)               2       2



       Since either Equation (116) or Equation (118) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that
       InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q                    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                                                                                                pp1 ,φ1 q
2. If q is such that maxtep1 , ep2 u                                            q ¤ Qpp2 ,φ2 q , then

– If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then
    pp1 ,φ1 q
  U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

   ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                          1   1
                                                   1                                    2
                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                p1                                    p1                         p2                              p2


   ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                          1   1
                                                   1
                                                                    p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                   2    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p2                              p2


   ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                              2                    1                         1
                                                                                 1          1
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                       p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2       2                      p2             p2


   ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                              2                    1
                                                                                 1          1                                              2       2


   ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                      1
                                                            1       1                                                     2    2



  Since Equation (115) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s.
  Observe that if q is such that U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                                                                     pp ,φ q                                                       ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

    pp ,φ q
  U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q                  ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

   ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                          1   1
                                                   1                                    2
                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                p1                                    p1                         p2                              p2


   ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                          1   1
                                                   1
                                                                    p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                   2    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p2                              p2


   ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                      1                     1
                                                                1    1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                          p1                                    p1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2       2                        p2                 p2




                                                                                                                      36
     ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q
                                          1
                                                                 1       1
                                                                                                     InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q                         from lemma 4.1                                                 (119)

    Since either Equation (116) or Equation (119) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q
    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
 – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then

       pp1 ,φ1 q
    U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

     ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                          1
                              1       1
                                                 2                                       2
                                                                                             2       2
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                         p1                         p1                           p2            p2


     ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                          1
                              1       1
                                                 2
                                                                     p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                          2    2
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 p2            p2


     ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                      1         2                                1
                                                                                     1       1                     p1                                 p1
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                             2   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p2            p2


     ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                      1         2
                                                                                     1       1                                       2       2


     ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                          2
                                                             1           1                                          2        2



    Since Equation (115) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s.
    Observe that if q is such that U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                                                                         pp ,φ q                                                 ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

       pp ,φ q
    U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q             ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

     ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                          1
                              1       1
                                                 1                                       2
                                                                                             2       2
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                         p1                         p1                           p2            p2


     ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                          1
                              1       1
                                                 1
                                                                     p1                                       p1
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                          2    2
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                 p2            p2


     ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                          2                  1
                                                                 1       1                                   p1                          p1
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                             2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              p2             p2


     ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                          2
                                                                 1       1
                                                                                                                     (120)
                                                                                                                        2        2



    Since either Equation (116) or Equation (120) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q
    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.

• Case 1.2: np1  0 (q2  eopp2 q,µp2 p0q )
                                                                                         pp1 ,φ1 q                                               pp1 ,φ1 q
  First, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                     ,φ q
                                          , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                             2           2

  have:

    pp1 ,φ1 q
  T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

   ñ        max ttp1  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ qu ¤ Φ
                                                    µp2 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
                                                      1
            pp1 ,φ1 q
       q̃ PΩpp ,φ q pq q
              2 2


   ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                      2
                                  1
                                  2
                                                1                                    2
                                                                                         2       2                           p2                                p2


   ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      1
                      2
                                  1
                                  2
                                                1                                    2
                                                                                         2       2                      p2                                p2


   ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                      1
                      2
                                  1
                                  2                              1           1                                          2        2


   ñ @q̃ P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                                     1               2                       2
                                                                                                 2       2                               1       1                               2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (121)

                                                                                             pp1 ,φ1 q                                               pp ,φ q
  Second, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                      ,φ q
                                           , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 q                                                                                       ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                                 2           2

  have:

    pp ,φ q
  T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q             ∆p1 p q q  ∆p2 p q q

   ñ         max              ttp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃qu Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                      1                  2

         P pp2 ,φ2 q p q                                     2       2                                        p2                             p2
       q̃ Ωpp1 ,φ1 q q



                                                                                                                   37
 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2
                                                           1                                   2
                                                                                                   2        2                               p2                                    p2


 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2
                                                           1                                    2
                                                                                                    2       2                          p2                                 p2


 ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                       1
                       2
                               1
                               2                                                   1       1                                            2    2


 ñ Dq̃1 P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q
                                                                       1           2                    2
                                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                     (122)                                1       1                                         2   2


Let q P rQpppp ,φ   q , mintep , ep us be such that T pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 q ¤ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq and T pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 q
                                                        pp ,φ q
                                                                                                                              1    1
                                                                                                    pp ,φ q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1   1
                ,φ q
                   1       1                           1           2
                                                                                                                              2    2                                                  1                 2                   2   2
                   2       2

∆p pq q  ∆p pq q. Equation (121) is equivalent to @q̃ P r0, Θpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q
   1               2                                                                                                                                                  2       2                             1   1                   2   2

and Equation (122) is equivalent to Dq̃ 1 P r0, Θpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ 1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ 1 q. This means         2    2                                      1       1                                 2   2

that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                                 pp ,φ q                            pp ,φ q           pp ,φ q
Let q P rmintep , ep u, Qpp ,φ q s be such that maxtT pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu ¤ ∆p pq q 
                                                                   1       1                                                                      1           1                                     1   1
                                   1           2
                                                                   2       2                                                                      2           2                                     2   2                           1
                         pp ,φ q           pp ,φ q
∆p pq q and mintT pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , 1qu ∆p pq q ∆p pq q. We consider the two following
                                           1       1                                               1        1
   2                                       2       2                                               2        2                                                     1                       2

subcases:

1. If q is such that mintep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ maxtep1 , ep2 u, then
   – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then
         pp1 ,φ1 q
       U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2                                    p2                                 p2


      ñ tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2                               p2                                 p2


      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                                       1                   1                                    2
                                                                                                                    2     2                       p2                                      p2


      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                                       1
                                                                                                   1     1                                            2       2


     Since Equation (121) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
     r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                                                                                                                                                                      1       1                                     2   2
                                                                                                                                        1    1
                   2       2                                                                                                            2    2                                                  1                   2


       pp ,φ q
     U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ∆p pq q  ∆p pq q
           1   1
           2   2                                                           1                            2


      ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2
                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                     p2                               p2


      ñ tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2
                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                p2                               p2


      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                                       1                       1                                2
                                                                                                                    2     2                           p2                                   p2


      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                                       1
                                                                                                   1        1
                                                                                                               (123)                                      2       2


     Since either Equation (122) or Equation (123) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp ,φ q s such that                                                                                                                      2   2

     InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ 1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                           1       1                                                   2       2

   – If mintep , ep u  ep , then
                           1           2                   2


       pp ,φ q
     U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p pq q  ∆p pq q
           1   1
           2   2                                                           1                            2


      ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                     p2                               p2


      ñ tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
               1                                   2
                                                       2       2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                p2                               p2


      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                                       2
                                                                                                   1     1                                            2       2


     Since Equation (121) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
     r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                                                                                                                                                                      1       1                                     2   2
                                                                                                                                        1    1
                   2       2                                                                                                            2    2                                                  1                   2


       pp ,φ q
     U pp ,φ q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ∆p pq q  ∆p pq q
           1   1
           2   2                                                           1                            2




                                                                                                                              38
       ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                               p2                        p2


       ñ tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                          p2                        p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                       2              1                    2
                                                                               2    2                    p2                         p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                       2
                                                                  1   1                                      2       2
                                                                                                                                                                   (124)

      Since either Equation (122) or Equation (124) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that
      InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q             InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
                                                                          pp1 ,φ1 q
2. If q is such that maxtep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ Qpp2 ,φ2 q , then

   – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then
        pp1 ,φ1 q
      U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                               p2                        p2


       ñ tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                          p2                        p2


       ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                               2                  1           1                         2
                                                                                            2   2                        p2              p2


       ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                               2                  1
                                                                            1       1                                    2    2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                   1
                                                                  1   1                                  2       2



      Since Equation (121) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
      r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                  2   2
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                     ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

        pp ,φ q
      U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q            ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          1
                                                                               p2                        p2


       ñ tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          1
                                                                          p2                        p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                       1              1                    2
                                                                               2    2                    p2                         p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                       1
                                                                  1   1                                      2       2
                                                                                                                                                                   (125)

      Since either Equation (122) or Equation (125) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that
      InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q             InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.
   – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then
        pp1 ,φ1 q
      U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q ¤ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ tp  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¤ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                               p2                        p2


       ñ tp ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                          p2                        p2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¤ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                   2
                                                                  1   1                                  2       2
                                                                                                                                  from lemma 4.1

      Since Equation (121) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¤ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
      r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 1q
                  2   2
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                     ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

        pp ,φ q
      U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 1q            ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ tp                               1
                         q pq  e q Φµ p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                      InvSoCqp22 ,φ2
                                 p
                  p
              1                                           2
                                                                               p2                        p2


       ñ tp InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
              1                    2
                                       2    2
                                                          2
                                                                          p2                        p2




                                                                                        39
              ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s,    2
                                                  tp1           InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q  Φ
                                                                                             µp p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                               2


              ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s,    2
                                                  InvSoCqp1 ,φ1     p           q   pq̃1 q      InvSoCqp2 ,φ2
                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                    q pq̃ q    from lemma 4.1               (126)

             Since either Equation (122) or Equation (126) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp2 ,φ2 q s such that
             InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q       InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp1 , φ1 q ¡q pp2 , φ2 q.


   Case 2: If np2  0 or Θpp2 ,φ2 q ¥ Θpp1 ,φ1 q , we have to consider two cases: np2 ¡ 0 and np2  0 (note that
np1 ¡ 0 since we never check the dominance of a RP that does not contain any CS).

   • Case 2.1: np2 ¡ 0 (q1  eopp1 q,µp1 p0q and q2  eopp2 q,µp2 p0q )
                                                                        pp1 ,φ1 q                                  pp ,φ q
     First, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                        ,φ q
                                             , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                   2        2

     have:

       pp ,φ q
     T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ô     min            tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃qu ¥ ∆p1 pqq  Φµp12 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
         P pp2 ,φ2 q p q
          q̃ Ωpp1 ,φ1 q q


      ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃q ¥ Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q  Φµp12 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
      ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃q  Φµp12 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
      ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
      ñ @q̃ P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                              1        2                1
                                                                            1   1                      1   1                       2   2
                                                                                                                                                            (127)

                                                                         pp1 ,φ1 q                                 pp1 ,φ1 q
     Second, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                         ,φ q
                                              , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                        2       2

     have:

       pp1 ,φ1 q
     T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ô      max tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃ q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃ qu ¡ ∆p1 pq q  Φ             µp2 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
                                                                                                    1
         P pp2 ,φ2 q p q
          q̃ Ωpp1 ,φ1 q q


      ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q  InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q ¡ Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q  Φµp12 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
      ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q  Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp22 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q  Φµp12 p0q pq  eo,µp2 p0q q
      ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
      ñ Dq̃1 P rmaxt0, q  mintep1 , ep2 uu, Θqpp11 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q                               (128)

                                                                                             pp ,φ q                                            pp1 ,φ1 q
     Let q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                     ,φ q
                          , mintep1 , ep2 us be such that T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q and T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡
                      2     2

     ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q. Equation (127) is equivalent to @q̃ P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q
     and Equation (128) is equivalent to Dq̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. This means
     that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                                  pp1 ,φ1 q                            pp ,φ q              pp ,φ q
     Let q P rmintep1 , ep2 u, Qpp2 ,φ2 q s be such that mintT pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¥ ∆p1 pq q∆p2 pq q
               pp1 ,φ1 q                  pp1 ,φ1 q
     and maxtT pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q. We consider the two following sub-
     cases:

     1. If q is such that mintep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ maxtep1 , ep2 u, then




                                                                                               40
    – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then

         pp ,φ q
       U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                         1                            2
                                                                          2    2
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                              p1                        p1                               p2                     p2


       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                         1
                                                          p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                           2   2
                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                         p2                     p2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                     1            1
                                                      1       1
                                                                               1
                                                                                                     p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                     2   2                 p2        p2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                     1
                                                      1       1                                      2        2



       Since Equation (127) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
       r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                1    1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          2                                             1                            2


         pp1 ,φ1 q
       U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                         1                            2
                                                                          2    2                              p1                               p1                        p2                           p2


       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                         1
                                                          p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                           2   2                         p2                           p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                     1            1
                                                      1       1
                                                                                   1
                                                                                                     p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                     2    2                 p2        p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                     1
                                                      1       1                                           2       2
                                                                                                                    (129)

       Since either Equation (128) or Equation (129) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
       InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
    – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then

         pp ,φ q
       U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                                          2
                                                              2   2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                              p1                               p1                        p2                           p2


       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1           p1                           p1
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                          2        2
                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                         p2                           p2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                     2            1
                                                      1       1                        p1                             p1
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                 2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                                           p2        p2


       ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                     2
                                                      1       1                                      2        2



       Since Equation (127) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
       r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                1    1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          2                                             1                            2


         pp1 ,φ1 q
       U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1
                                                          2
                                                              2   2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                                              p1                               p1                        p2                           p2


       ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                         1
                             1   1           p1                           p1
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                          2        2
                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                         p2                           p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                                     2            1
                                                      1       1                         p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                     2       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                            p2        p2


       ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                     2
                                                      1       1                                           2       2
                                                                                                                    (130)

       Since either Equation (128) or Equation (130) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
       InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                                                                      pp1 ,φ1 q
2. If q is such that maxtep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ Qpp2 ,φ2 q , then

– If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then

    pp ,φ q
  U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q


                                                                                        41
    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1                           2
                                                                    2   2
                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                p1                       p1                       p2                    p2


    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1
                                                   p1                        p1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                  p2                    p2


    ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                           2       1                    1
                                                            1       1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                       p1                           p1
                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                           2   2             p2         p2


    ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                           2       1
                                                            1       1                                  2        2


    ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                               1
                                           1       1                                  2        2



    Since Equation (127) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s.
                                                    pp1 ,φ1 q
    Observe that if q is such that U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

      pp1 ,φ1 q
    U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1                           2
                                                                    2   2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                p1                       p1                       p2                    p2


    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1
                                                   p1                        p1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                  p2                    p2


    ñ Dq̃1 P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                           2        1                   1
                                                            1       1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                                       p1                           p1
                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                           2   2              p2         p2


    ñ Dq̃1 P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                           2        1
                                                            1       1                                       2       2


    ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q
                               1
                                               1    1                                      2       2
                                                                                                                    (131)

    Since either Equation (128) or Equation (131) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡
    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
 – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then

      pp ,φ q
    U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1                           2
                                                                    2   2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                p1                       p1                       p2                    p2


    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    1
                                                   p1                        p1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                  p2                    p2


    ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                           1       2                    1
                                                            1       1                 p1                                p1
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                              2   2
                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                             p2         p2


    ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                           1       2
                                                            1       1                                  2        2


    ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                               2
                                           1       1                                  2        2



    Since Equation (127) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s.
                                                    pp1 ,φ1 q
    Observe that if q is such that U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we have:

      pp1 ,φ1 q
    U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    2                           2
                                                                    2   2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                p1                       p1                       p2                    p2


    ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                   1
                       1   1
                                    2
                                                   p1                        p1
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                            2   2
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                  p2                    p2


    ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                               2           1
                                               1    1                       p1                              p1
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                  2   2
                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                       p2          p2


    ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                               2
                                               1    1                                      2       2
                                                                                                                      (132)

    Since either Equation (128) or Equation (132) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡
    InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.

• Case 2.2: np2  0 (q1  eopp1 q,µp1 p0q )
                                                                pp1 ,φ1 q                                            pp ,φ q
  First, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                     ,φ q
                                          , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                           2       2




                                                                                  42
have:

  pp ,φ q
T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

ô        p
          min
          p1 ,φ1 q
                      tInvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃q  tp2 u ¥ ∆p1 pqq
    q̃ PΩpp ,φ q pq q
           2 2


ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  tp ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                 1
                 2
                      1
                      2
                                                   1
                                                       1   1
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                       p1                           p1


ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                 1
                 2
                      1
                      2
                                                   1
                                                       1   1                                p1                           p1
                                                                                                                                              2




ñ @q̃ P Ωpppp ,φ,φ qq pqq, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                 1
                 2
                      1
                      2                                1   1                                            2       2


ñ @q̃ P rmaxt0, q  mintep , ep uu, Θqpp ,φ q s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                           1           2                    1
                                                                                1   1                               1    1                            2   2
                                                                                                                                                                              (133)

                                                                            pp1 ,φ1 q                                             pp1 ,φ1 q
Second, observe that if q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                                    ,φ q
                                         , Qpp2 ,φ2 q s is such that T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q, then we
                                                       2   2

have:

  pp1 ,φ1 q
T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

ô      max tInvSoCpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q  t u ¡ ∆p1 pq q
                                      q1                           p2
   P pp2 ,φ2 q p q
    q̃ Ωpp1 ,φ1 q q


ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q  tp2 ¡ Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q
ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp11 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q  Φµp11 p0q pq  eo,µp1 p0q q ¡ tp2
ñ Dq̃1 P Ωpppp12 ,φ,φ12 qq pqq, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
ñ Dq̃1 P rmaxt0, q  mintep1 , ep2 uu, Θqpp11 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃1 q                                                                      (134)

                                                                                                 pp ,φ q                                                          pp1 ,φ1 q
Let q P rQpppp1 ,φ1q
                ,φ q
                     , mintep1 , ep2 us be such that T pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q and T pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q ¡
                 2    2

∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q. Equation (133) is equivalent to @q̃ P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q
and Equation (134) is equivalent to Dq̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s, InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. This means
that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                             pp1 ,φ1 q                            pp ,φ q              pp ,φ q
Let q P rmintep1 , ep2 u, Qpp2 ,φ2 q s be such that mintT pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp21 ,φ21 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¥ ∆p1 pq q∆p2 pq q
          pp1 ,φ1 q                  pp1 ,φ1 q
and maxtT pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 q, U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2qu ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q. We consider the two following sub-
cases:

1. If q is such that mintep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ maxtep1 , ep2 u, then

    – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then

          pp ,φ q
        U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

         ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                          1
                              1   1
                                               1                   2
                                                                                        p1                              p1


         ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                          1
                              1   1
                                               1
                                                                       p1                              p1
                                                                                                                              2




         ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                                      1                    1
                                                               1        1                         p1                          p1
                                                                                                                                                  2




         ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                      1
                                                               1        1                                       2        2



        Since Equation (133) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
        r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                 1    1
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                    2                                 1       2


          pp1 ,φ1 q
        U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q


                                                                                                   43
      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1                2
                                                                  p1                        p1


      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1
                                                             p1                p1
                                                                                                        2




      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                                    1            1
                                                     1        1               p1                            p1
                                                                                                                          2




      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                    1
                                                     1        1                             2       2
                                                                                                                                       (135)

      Since either Equation (134) or Equation (135) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
      InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
   – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then

        pp ,φ q
      U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  tp ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                        1
                            1   1
                                        2
                                                             p1                p1


      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q p0q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                        1
                            1   1           p1                      p1
                                                                                        2




      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                                    2            1
                                                     1       1            p1                            p1
                                                                                                                      2




      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                    2
                                                     1       1                          2       2



      Since Equation (133) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
      r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
               1    1
                                                                                    1
                                                                                    2
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            2                                 1    2


        pp1 ,φ1 q
      U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                        1
                            1   1
                                        2                2
                                                                  p1                        p1


      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                        1
                            1   1
                                        2
                                                             p1                p1
                                                                                                        2




      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                                    2            1
                                                     1        1               p1                            p1
                                                                                                                          2




      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                    2
                                                     1        1                             2       2
                                                                                                                                       (136)

      Since either Equation (134) or Equation (136) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
      InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
                                                                  pp1 ,φ1 q
2. If q is such that maxtep1 , ep2 u ¤ q ¤ Qpp2 ,φ2 q , then

   – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep1 , then

        pp ,φ q
      U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1                2
                                                                  p1                        p1


      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1
                                                             p1                p1
                                                                                                        2




      ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                    1
                                                     1       1                          2       2
                                                                                                                 from lemma 4.1

      Since Equation (133) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
      r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
               1    1
                                                                                    1
                                                                                    2
                                                                                            1
                                                                                            2                                 1    2


        pp1 ,φ1 q
      U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1                2
                                                                  p1                        p1


      ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                        1
                            1   1
                                        1
                                                             p1                p1
                                                                                                        2




      ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q1 ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q
                                    1
                                                     1        1                             2       2
                                                                                                                  from lemma 4.1       (137)


                                                                              44
           Since either Equation (134) or Equation (137) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
           InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.
        – If mintep1 , ep2 u  ep2 , then

             pp ,φ q
           U pp12 ,φ12 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¥ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

           ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¥ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q qq
                             1
                                 1   1
                                             1        2
                                                                       p1                  p1


           ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                             1
                                 1   1
                                             1
                                                          p1                 p1
                                                                                                       2




           ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¥ tp
                                     1       2                 1
                                                                   1   1              p1                        p1
                                                                                                                             2




           ñ @q̃ P rq  ep , q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q from lemma 4.1
                                     1       2
                                                                   1   1                               2    2


           ñ @q̃ P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q ¥ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃q
                                         2
                                                  1       1                           2        2



           Since Equation (133) holds, we therefore have InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ q ¥ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ q for every q̃ P
           r0, Θpp ,φ q s. Observe that if q is such that U pppp ,φ,φ qq pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p pqq  ∆p pqq, then we have:
                    1    1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  2
                                                                                           1
                                                                                           2                             1       2


             pp1 ,φ1 q
           U pp2 ,φ2 q pq, q1 , q2 , 2q ¡ ∆p1 pq q  ∆p2 pq q

           ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  tp ¡ Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q qq
                             1
                                 1   1
                                             2        2
                                                                       p1                  p1


           ñ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq  ep q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                             1
                                 1   1
                                             2
                                                          p1                 p1
                                                                                                       2




           ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q  Φµ 1 p0q pq  eo,µ p0q q ¡ tp
                                         2        1
                                                      1    1                p1                             p1
                                                                                                                     2




           ñ Dq̃1 P r0, q  ep s, InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp ,φ q pq̃1 q from lemma 4.1
                                         2
                                                      1    1                               2       2
                                                                                                                                     (138)

           Since either Equation (134) or Equation (138) holds, there exists q̃ 1 P r0, Θpp1 ,φ1 q s such that
           InvSoCqpp1 ,φ1 q pq̃ 1 q ¡ InvSoCqpp2 ,φ2 q pq̃ 1 q. Therefore, we can conclude that pp2 , φ2 q ¡q pp1 , φ1 q.




C     Example requiring a large number of CS copies
Figure 6 depicts an example in which a CS is visited 4|I | times in the optimal solution. In this example, we
have one depot (denoted by 0), one customer (denoted by 1), and two CSs (denoted by 2 and 3). The service
time at the customer is equal to 0.5, the battery capacity of the EVs is equal to 10, and Tmax is set to 40.
The optimal solution to the E-VRP-NL contains one route (0, 2, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 2, 0) and the total time is equal
to 37.7. In this solution, the SoC of the EV upon arriving for the first time at CS 2 is equal to 1. To visit
customer 1, the EV must necessarily leave CS 2 with a fully charged battery. Fully recharging the battery from
1 to full capacity at CS 2 takes 11.2 time units. However, by detouring to CS 3, the EV can obtain a fully
charged battery in less time. Indeed, if the EV charges one energy unit at CS 2, 10 energy units at CS 3, and
finally two energy units at CS 2, then the EV is fully charged in 11 time units (taking the round trip time to
CS 3 into account). Moreover, after visiting customer 1, the EV arrives at CS 2 with an empty battery. To
return to the depot, the EV must necessarily leave CS 2 with a SoC equal to 90%. Charging nine energy units
at CS 2 takes in that case 10.4 time units. However, if the EV charges two energy units at CS 2, 10 energy
units at CS 3, and finally one energy unit at CS 2, then the target SoC for the EV at CS 2 is obtained in 10.2
time units. In this example with only one customer, CS 2 is visited four times.




                                                                            45
                 Figure 6: Example for which a CS is visited 4|I | times in the optimal solution

                                                                                           100


                                                                                           80




                                                                                 SoC (%)
                                                                                           60


                                                                                           40                                   CS 2
                                                                                                                                CS 3
                                                                                           20


                                                                                             0
                                                                                                 0 1    2    3   4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                                                                                                                  Charging time



D      Examples showing the non-optimality of the Montoya et al. (2017)
       procedure
Here we introduce two examples showing that the procedure proposed by Montoya et al. (2017) to set the
number β of CS copies is not necessarily optimal. We show this for both the case with nonlinear (example 1)
and the case with linear (example 2) charging function approximations.
    In the first example (denoted example 1), we have one depot (denoted by 0), two customers (denoted by 1
and 2), and one CS (denoted by 3). The service time at the customers is equal to 0.5, the battery capacity of
the EVs is equal to 10 and Tmax is set to 20. Tables 5a and 5b show the driving time and energy consumption
between the nodes. Figure 5c depicts the charging function at the CS.

                                                   Table 5: Data of example 1.

          i\j    0   1    2    3                                                 i\j         0           1       2     3
            0    0   4    4    2                                                   0         0           5       5     3
            1    4   0    5    3                                                   1         5           0       7   2.5
            2    4   5    0    3                                                   2         5           7       0     5
            3    2   3    3    0                                                   3         3         2.5       5     0
         (a) Driving times ptij q.                                         (b) Energy consumption peij q.

                                                 100


                                                 80




                                       SoC (%)
                                                 60


                                                 40


                                                 20


                                                  0
                                                       0   1        2        3               4
                                                               Charging time


                                     (c) Charging function associated with CS 3



    For β  0 (i.e., the CS cannot be visited) and β  1 (i.e., the CS can be visited at most once), the optimal
solutions contains two routes p0, 1, 0q and p0, 2, 0q and the total time is equal to 17. According to the Montoya
et al. (2017) procedure, β will then be fixed to 0. However, for β  2 (i.e., the CS can be visited at most twice),
the optimal solution contains one route p0, 2, 3, 1, 3, 0q and the total time is equal to 16.8. In this solution, the
EV arrives at CS 3 with an empty battery. We charge the battery up to 50% and 30% during the first and


                                                                46
second visits, which takes 0.5 and 0.3 time units, respectively.

    Now consider the case where the charging function is linear. We introduce another example (denoted as
example 2). We have one depot (denoted by 0), four customers (denoted by 1, 2, 3, and 4), and one CS
(denoted by 5). The service time at the customers is equal to 0.5, the battery capacity of the EVs is equal to
10 and Tmax is set to 10. Tables 6a and 6b show the driving times and energy consumption between the nodes.
Figure 6c shows the charging function at the CS 5.

                                                      Table 6: Data of example 2.

      i\j     0     1   2   3   4    5                                      i\j      0       1     2     3     4   5
        0     0     1   2   2   1    1                                        0      0     2.5     3     3   2.5   6
        1     1     0   1   1   1    1                                        1    2.5       0     5   5.5     5   4
        2     2     1   0   1   1    1                                        2      3       5     0     2   5.5   4
        3     2     1   1   0   1    1                                        3      3     5.5     2     0     5   4
        4     1     1   1   1   0    1                                        4    2.5       5   5.5     5     0   4
        5     1     1   1   1   1    0                                        5      6       4     4     4     4   0
         (a) Driving times ptij q.                                             (b) Energy consumption peij q.

                                                    100


                                                    80




                                          SoC (%)
                                                    60


                                                    40


                                                    20


                                                     0
                                                          0   0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4      0.5
                                                                    Charging time


                                         (c) Charging function associated with CS 5



    For β  0 and β  1, the optimal solutions contains two routes p0, 1, 4, 0q and p0, 2, 3, 0q and the total time
is equal to 10. According to the Montoya et al. (2017) procedure, β will then be fixed to 0. However, for β  2,
the optimal solution contains one route p0, 1, 5, 2, 3, 5, 4, 0q and the total time is equal to 9.65. At the first visit
to the CS, the arrival SoC is 35% and we charge the battery up to 100%, which takes 0.325 time units. At the
second visit to the CS, the arrival SoC of the EV is 0 and we charge the battery up to 65%, which takes 0.325
time units.
    Note that if we assume a full charging policy and a constant charging time δ ¥ 0 in Example 2, the solutions
remain the same. The solution for β  0 or 1 has an objective value equal to 10. The solution for β  2 is
equal to 9        2δ. Therefore a better solution is found as soon as δ                 0.5.

    In conclusion, the procedure of Montoya et al. (2017) is not guaranteed to be optimal for constant, linear,
and nonlinear charging functions.



E     Algorithmic details

E.1     Algorithmic details on the labeling algorithm for the FRVCP




                                                                     47
     Algorithm 3: LabelingAlgo(Π)
      input : a route Π that is not energy-feasible
      output: a route Π1 that is energy-feasible if found, the initial route otherwise
 1    forall l P Π Y tF u do L1 plq Ð H (L1 plq stores the unprocessed labels associated with node l) ;
 2    forall l P Π Y tF u do L2 plq Ð H (L2 plq stores the processed labels associated with node l) ;
 3    Add to L1 pΠp0qq the label corresponding to a RP containing only the departing depot Πp0q
 4    R Ð tΠp0qu (R stores nodes with unprocessed labels)
 5    while R  H do
 6       l Ð minElement(R) (removes from R the node associated with a RP pp, φq with the minimum total time)
 7       ppl , φl q Ð deleteMin(L1 plq) (removes from L1 plq the label with the minimum total time)
 8       if l  ΠpnpΠqq then
 9                if pl contains a CS then
10                      Set the SoC target value at the last CS of pl in such a way the EV arrives with an empty battery at l
11                end
12                Let Π1 be the route corresponding to label pl , φl
                                                                p      q
13                return Π1
14          end
15               p q  H then R Ð Rztlu ;
            if L1 l
16                        pq p q
            Update(L2 l , pl , φl )
17
                        1
            forall pl, l q P Ĝij do
18              if IsExtendable(ppl , φl q,l1 ) then (checks if RP pp, φq can be extended to node l1 )
19                   ppl1 , φl1 q ÐExtendpppl , φl q, l1 q (extends RP ppl , φl q to node l1 )
20                   K ÐCreateLabelspppl1 , φl1 qq (if l1 is a CS and pl1 contains more than a CS, then it creates relevant labels
                       according to the supporting points of the SoC function associated with RP ppl1 , φl1 q, otherwise K only
                       contains ppl1 , φl1 q)
21                   forall pp, φq P K do
22                         Update(L1 pl1 q, pp, φq) (inserts RP pp, φq in L1 pl1 q if it is not dominated according to the dominance rule
                              introduced in Definition 4.1, and verifies if previously inserted labels become dominated)
23                      end
24                      if L1 l1 has changed and l1
                              pq                      R R then R Ð R Y tl1 u ;
25                end
26          end
27    end

28    return Π




                                                                           48
E.2         Algorithmic details on the heuristic algorithm to solve the FRVCP

     Algorithm 4: locateCS1(Π0 )
      input : A route Π0               tπp0q, πp1q,    , πpiq,    , πpnpΠq  1q, πpnpΠqqu
      output: (f, Π, Πbest ) where Π is the best route obtained if if boolean f is equal to true, or the initial route Π0 otherwise.
                      Πbest represents the current best energy-feasible route with the minimum duration (under the H charging policy)
                      that may have been computed during the procedure
 1    Π Ð Π0
 2    Πbest Ð null
 3    i Ð 0, n Ð npΠq
 4    while i          n do
 5                                     pq
            if the arc connecting π i and π i  p 1q was eliminated during the preprocessing procedure then
 6                pf, Π, Πbest q Ð insertCS(i,Π,Πbest )
 7                if f  false then
 8                       return (false, Π0 , Πbest )
 9                end
10                n    Ðn         1
11          else
12                i   Ði      1
13          end
14    end

15    return (true, Π, Πbest )




                                                                                  49
     Algorithm 5: insertCS(i, Π0 , Πbest )
      input : A route Π0                  tπp0q, πp1q,    , πpiq,    , πpn  1q, πpnqu
                  A position i where to insert a CS of set F
                  The current best energy-feasible route Πbest
      output: (f, Π, Πbest ). Π is the route yielding the minimum lower bound on the duration to travel it if f is equal to true, or
                  the initial route Π0 otherwise. Πbest represents the current best energy-feasible route and may have been updated
                  by the procedure
 1    Π  Ð Π0
 2    s Ð getEnergyDeficit(Π0 )
 3    tbest Ð mintTmax , getTime(Πbest )u
 4    t̃ Ð 8, f Ð false
 5    for j P F do
 6         if the arcs connecting π piq to j and j to π pi 1q were not eliminated during the preprocess then
                   1
 7              Π Ð copyAndInsert(Π0 , j, i)
                                            1
 8              s1 Ð getEnergyDeficit(Π )
                                  1
 9              t̃1 Ð getLBTime(Π )
                ; /* Let nextpΠ, j q be the first CS or depot node following node j in route Π                                   */
                                             1             1        1
10              if t̃1 tbest ^ s1 s ^ Y pΠ , j q ¥ 0 _ Y pΠ , nextpΠ , j qq ¥ 0 then
11                      if t̃1        t̃ then
12                               t̃Ð t̃1
                                         1
13                               ΠÐΠ
14                               f Ð true
15                      end
16                      if s1      0 then
17                               t1Ð getTime(Π1 )
18                               if t1      tbest then
19                                       tbestÐ t1
                                                   1
20                                       Πbest Ð Π
21                               end
22                      end
23                end
24          end
25    end

26    return (f,Π,Πbest )




                                                                                       50
     Algorithm 6: locateCS2(Π0 , Πbest )
      input : A route Π0                tπp0q, πp1q,    , πpiq,    , πpj q,    , πpn  1q, πpnqu
                     The current best energy-feasible route Πbest
      output: Πbest where Πbest represents the energy-feasible route with the minimum duration under the H charging rule
                     policy
 1    Π Ð Π0
 2    tÐ 8
 3    f Ð false
 4    while true do
 5           for i     0    npΠq  1 do
                           1
 6                  (f’, Π , Πbest ) Ð insertCS(i,Π,Πbest )
 7                  if f’  true then
 8                       f Ð true
                                            1
 9                       t1 Ð getLBTime(Π )
10                        if t1       t then
11                                tÐ t1
                                        1
12                                ΠÐΠ
13                        end
14                  end
15           end
16           if f    true then
17                  ΠÐΠ
18           else
19                  return Πbest
20           end
21    end

22    return null




     Algorithm 7: reviseChargingAmount(Π0 )
                                                                                                             pq
      input : A route Π0 visiting m CS(s) numbered in the order of visits from 1 to m (let f i be the i-th CS visited)
      output: (f, Π) where Π is an energy-feasible route derived from Π0 after optimizing the charging decisions, and f is equal
                     to true if the maximum-duration limit is not exceeded, false otherwise.
 1    Π   Ð Π0
                            pq              pq            pq
      ; /* Let SoC1 i , SoC2 i , and ch i be the arrival and departure SoC and the amount of energy charged at the
       i-th CS visited                                                                                                                         */
                 pq          pq                                                  pq           pq
      ; /* Let b1 i and b2 i be the segment associated with the SoC SoC1 i and SoC2 i for the i-th CS visited                                  */
 2    i Ð m  1, t Ð getTime(Π      best )
 3    while i ¥ 1 do
 4        while ρf piq,b piq ¡ ρf pi 1q,b pi 1q ^ chpi 1q ¡ 0 do
                                  2                 1

 5            Transfer from the pi 1q-th to the i  th CS of route Π the amount of energy mintchpi                 q
                                                                                                                  1 , af piq,b2 piq    SoC2 piqu
 6            Update accordingly SoC1 pi 1q, SoC2 piq, chpi 1q, b2 piq, b1 pi 1q and the duration t
 7           end
 8           i   Ði1
 9    end
10    if t   ¤ Tmax then
11           return (true, Π)
12    end

13    return (false, Π0 )




                                                                                       51
F       Detailed computational results

F.1       E-VRP-NL
We represent each instance using the code tcγ1 cγ2 sγ3 cγ4 #, where γ1 is the method used to place the customers
(i.e., 0) randomization, 1) combination of randomization and clustering, 2) clustering), γ2 is the number of
customers, γ3 is the number of CSs, γ4 is “t” if we use a p-median heuristic to locate the CSs and “f” otherwise,
and # is the number of the instance for each combination of parameters (i.e., # = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4). The symbol
“Inf” means that the instance was proven infeasible, whereas the symbol “-” means that no feasible solution
was found by the solver but the instance was not proven infeasible. The CPU time reported in column “Time
(s)” in the following tables is in seconds and rounded to the nearest integer.


F.1.1     CS replication-based models


Table 7: Detailed computational results on the 10-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  1)

                    Instance
                                           r       s
                                               CS rep
                                              FArc                       r       s
                                                                            CS rep
                                                                           FN ode
                                   Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                    tc0c10s2cf1     Inf   Inf         Inf    0   Inf   Inf        6.02    0
                    tc0c10s2ct1   12.30 12.30       9.05     1 12.30 12.30        6.33    2
                    tc0c10s3cf1     Inf   Inf      12.06     0   Inf   Inf        6.02    0
                    tc0c10s3ct1   10.80 10.80       7.72     1 10.80 10.80        5.13    5
                    tc1c10s2cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     1 9.03   9.03        5.56   27
                    tc1c10s2cf3     Inf   Inf         Inf    0   Inf   Inf        3.42    2
                    tc1c10s2cf4     Inf   Inf         Inf    0   Inf   Inf        6.47    0
                    tc1c10s2ct2   10.76 10.76       6.73     6 10.76 10.76        4.58  829
                    tc1c10s2ct3     Inf   Inf       9.83     0   Inf   Inf        3.18    4
                    tc1c10s2ct4     Inf   Inf         Inf    0   Inf   Inf        6.23    0
                    tc1c10s3cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     1 9.03   9.03        5.56   15
                    tc1c10s3cf3     Inf   Inf         Inf    0   Inf   Inf        3.42    1
                    tc1c10s3cf4   14.95 14.95      10.58     1 14.95 14.95        5.80    4
                    tc1c10s3ct2    9.20  9.20       6.36   11 9.20    9.20        4.46 1107
                    tc1c10s3ct3   13.02 13.02       7.14     4 13.02 13.02        3.16 1076
                    tc1c10s3ct4   13.21 13.21       8.85     4 13.21 13.21        6.09    6
                    tc2c10s2cf0     Inf   Inf       9.48     0   Inf   Inf        1.04    1
                    tc2c10s2ct0     Inf   Inf       4.67   13    Inf   Inf        0.89  103
                    tc2c10s3cf0     Inf   Inf       9.48     0   Inf   Inf        1.04    1
                    tc2c10s3ct0   11.51 11.51       4.21   63 11.51  11.51        0.89 1859




                                                        52
Table 8: Detailed computational results on the 10-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  2)

                   Instance
                                           r      s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                       r       s
                                                                           CS rep
                                                                          FN ode
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c10s2cf1     Inf   Inf      11.74     2   Inf   Inf        6.02     1
                   tc0c10s2ct1   12.30 12.30       8.94    19 12.30 12.30        6.33   142
                   tc0c10s3cf1   20.50 20.50      11.55    42 20.50 20.50        6.02    24
                   tc0c10s3ct1   10.80 10.80       7.69     3 10.80 10.80        5.13   157
                   tc1c10s2cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     3 9.03   9.03        5.56   102
                   tc1c10s2cf3     Inf   Inf      10.79    72   Inf   Inf        3.42   194
                   tc1c10s2cf4   16.14 16.14      12.15     5 16.14 16.14        6.47    11
                   tc1c10s2ct2   10.75 10.75       6.73    34 10.75  9.29        4.58 10800
                   tc1c10s2ct3     Inf   Inf       8.52    38   Inf   Inf        3.18    82
                   tc1c10s2ct4   13.83 13.83      10.68     5 13.83 13.83        6.23     9
                   tc1c10s3cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     3 9.03   9.03        5.56   184
                   tc1c10s3cf3   16.94 16.94      10.71    81 16.94 16.94        3.42  5430
                   tc1c10s3cf4   14.90 14.90      10.57    15 14.90 14.90        5.80   149
                   tc1c10s3ct2    9.20  9.20       6.36    57   9.2  8.21        4.46 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct3   13.02 13.02       7.07    36 13.08  6.80        3.16 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct4   13.21 13.21       8.75    22 13.21 13.21        6.09   375
                   tc2c10s2cf0     Inf   Inf       8.94   255   Inf   Inf        1.04    40
                   tc2c10s2ct0   13.84 13.84       4.67  1165 13.84 13.84        0.89  3944
                   tc2c10s3cf0     Inf   Inf       8.94  6156   Inf   Inf        1.04   340
                   tc2c10s3ct0   11.51 11.51         4.2  654 11.51  5.17        0.89 10800




Table 9: Detailed computational results on the 10-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  3)

                   Instance
                                           r      s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                       r       s
                                                                           CS rep
                                                                          FN ode
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c10s2cf1   19.75 19.75      11.74   21 19.75  19.75        6.02     9
                   tc0c10s2ct1   12.30 12.30       8.94   21 12.30  12.30        6.33   389
                   tc0c10s3cf1   19.75 19.75      11.55 1685 19.75  19.75        6.02  1718
                   tc0c10s3ct1   10.80 10.80       7.69     9 10.80 10.80        5.13   500
                   tc1c10s2cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     4 9.03   9.03        5.56   559
                   tc1c10s2cf3   16.37 16.37      10.79   39 16.37  16.37        3.42  5310
                   tc1c10s2cf4   16.10 16.10      12.14   10 16.10  16.10        6.47    69
                   tc1c10s2ct2   10.75 10.75       6.73  108 10.75   8.42        4.58 10800
                   tc1c10s2ct3   13.17 13.17       8.48   11 13.17  13.17        3.18  1049
                   tc1c10s2ct4   13.83 13.83      10.68   17 13.83  13.83        6.23    54
                   tc1c10s3cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72     6 9.03   9.03        5.56   611
                   tc1c10s3cf3   16.37 16.37      10.71  529 16.37  12.76        3.42 10800
                   tc1c10s3cf4   14.90 14.90      10.57   37 14.90  14.90        5.80  1159
                   tc1c10s3ct2    9.20  9.20       6.36   80 9.20    7.82        4.46 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct3   13.02 13.02       7.07  504 13.02   4.90        3.16 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct4   13.21 13.21       8.75   34 13.21  13.21        6.09  4040
                   tc2c10s2cf0   22.12 22.12       8.94 3647 22.12  19.56        1.04 10800
                   tc2c10s2ct0   12.45 12.45       4.67  334 12.45   7.14        0.89 10800
                   tc2c10s3cf0   22.12 22.12       8.94 8604 22.12  16.95        1.04 10800
                   tc2c10s3ct0   11.51 11.51       4.20  712 11.51   4.34        0.89 10800




                                                       53
Table 10: Detailed computational results on the 10-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  4)

                   Instance
                                           r       s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                         rCS rep
                                                                          FN ode s
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c10s2cf1   19.75 19.75      11.74    96 19.75 19.75        6.02    25
                   tc0c10s2ct1   12.30 12.30       8.94    81 12.30 12.30        6.33   133
                   tc0c10s3cf1   19.75 17.68      11.55 10800 19.75 14.47        6.02 10800
                   tc0c10s3ct1   10.80 10.80       7.69    37 10.80 10.80        5.13   445
                   tc1c10s2cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72    12 9.03   9.03        5.56   791
                   tc1c10s2cf3   16.37 16.37      10.79    82 16.37 13.86        3.42 10800
                   tc1c10s2cf4   16.10 16.10      12.14    26 16.10 16.10        6.47   144
                   tc1c10s2ct2   10.75 10.75       6.73   122 10.75  8.33        4.58 10800
                   tc1c10s2ct3   13.17 13.17       8.48    41 13.17 13.17        3.18  6136
                   tc1c10s2ct4   13.83 13.83      10.68    17 13.83 13.83        6.23    98
                   tc1c10s3cf2    9.03  9.03       6.72    10 9.03   9.03        5.56  1784
                   tc1c10s3cf3   16.37 16.37      10.71  1663 16.37 11.95        3.42 10800
                   tc1c10s3cf4   14.90 14.90      10.57    76 14.90 14.90        5.80  3250
                   tc1c10s3ct2    9.20  9.20       6.36   137 9.20   7.66        4.46 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct3   13.02 13.02       7.07   207 13.08  5.28        3.16 10800
                   tc1c10s3ct4   13.21 13.21       8.75    45 13.21 11.56        6.09 10800
                   tc2c10s2cf0   21.77 19.62       8.94 10800 21.77 12.70        1.04 10800
                   tc2c10s2ct0   12.45 12.45       4.67   789 12.45  6.32        0.89 10800
                   tc2c10s3cf0   21.77 16.86       8.94 10800 21.83 11.98        1.04 10800
                   tc2c10s3ct0   11.51  9.83       4.20 10800 11.56  4.90        0.89 10800




Table 11: Detailed computational results on the 20-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  1)

                   Instance
                                           r       s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                         r      s
                                                                            CS rep
                                                                           FN ode
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c20s3cf2     Inf   Inf         Inf     0   Inf   Inf         6.89    61
                   tc0c20s3ct2     Inf   Inf      11.65    460     -     -         6.96 10800
                   tc0c20s4cf2     Inf   Inf         Inf     0   Inf   Inf         6.86  3763
                   tc0c20s4ct2     Inf   Inf      10.89  10800     -     -         6.62 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf1   20.75 17.76      14.00  10800 20.78 14.68         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf3   16.80 16.10       9.81  10800 16.84 11.55         5.20 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf4     Inf   Inf      13.21     18   Inf   Inf         9.52     0
                   tc1c20s3ct1   24.42 19.23      14.85  10800 24.42 16.20         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct3   12.60 12.60       9.35    189 12.67 10.12         5.45 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct4   16.24 16.24      13.62     33 16.24 14.55        10.18 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf1   19.29 15.82      11.85  10800 19.68 12.97         7.63 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf3   16.80 16.80       9.81   6474 16.91 10.02         5.19 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf4   19.09 19.09      13.18    226 19.09 18.15         9.52 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct1   23.19 17.59      12.74  10800 23.19 14.54         7.65 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct3   14.43 14.43       9.69    553 14.43 10.54         5.23 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct4   17.14 17.14      13.00     51 17.14 16.41        10.08 10800
                   tc2c20s3cf0     Inf   Inf      11.32      1     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s3ct0     Inf   Inf      11.56     12     -     -         1.95 10800
                   tc2c20s4cf0     Inf   Inf      11.13    813     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s4ct0     Inf   Inf      11.43     18     -     -         1.94 10800




                                                        54
Table 12: Detailed computational results on the 20-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  2)

                   Instance
                                           r      s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                        r CS rep
                                                                          FN ode s
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c20s3cf2     Inf   Inf      14.89     4     -     -         6.89 10800
                   tc0c20s3ct2   17.08 15.34      11.64 10800 17.31 12.45         6.96 10800
                   tc0c20s4cf2     Inf   Inf      14.54     6   Inf   Inf         6.86  2841
                   tc0c20s4ct2   16.99 14.92      10.87 10800 17.21 11.97         6.62 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf1   17.53 17.53      13.91  8909 17.63 14.25         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf3   16.44 14.21       9.72 10800 16.53 10.07         5.19 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf4   17.00 17.00      13.21    87 17.00 17.00         9.41  8484
                   tc1c20s3ct1   19.49 19.00      14.74 10800 19.71 15.73         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct3   12.60 12.60       9.24  1086 12.60  9.29         5.45 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct4   16.21 16.21      13.35    94 16.21 14.44        10.17 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf1   16.40 15.42       11.8 10800 16.48 12.92         7.63 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf3   16.44 14.30       9.72 10800 16.94 10.04         5.19 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf4   17.00 17.00      13.17   174 17.01 15.18         9.41 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct1   18.36 17.25       12.6 10800 18.98 13.53         7.65 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct3   14.43 13.42       9.53 10800 14.43 10.43         5.23 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct4   17.00 17.00      12.78   222 17.00 15.73        10.02 10800
                   tc2c20s3cf0       -     -      11.18 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s3ct0       -     -      11.04 10800     -     -         1.95 10800
                   tc2c20s4cf0       -     -      11.02 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s4ct0       -     -      10.97 10800     -     -         1.94 10800




Table 13: Detailed computational results on the 20-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  3)

                   Instance
                                           r      s
                                              CS rep
                                             FArc                        r CS rep
                                                                          FN ode s
                                  Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                   tc0c20s3cf2     Inf   Inf      14.89  9074     -     -         6.89 10800
                   tc0c20s3ct2   17.25 15.06      11.63 10800 17.33 12.32         6.96 10800
                   tc0c20s4cf2     Inf   Inf      14.54  3619     -     -         6.86 10800
                   tc0c20s4ct2   16.99 14.76      10.87 10800 17.04 10.25         6.62 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf1   17.49 16.98      13.91 10800 17.49 14.31         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf3   16.44 14.04       9.72 10800 16.48  9.94         5.19 10800
                   tc1c20s3cf4   17.00 17.00      13.21   110 17.00 17.00         9.41  8706
                   tc1c20s3ct1   19.38 18.78      14.73 10800 20.06 15.36         8.02 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct3   12.60 12.60       9.24  1748 12.60  9.24         5.45 10800
                   tc1c20s3ct4   16.21 16.21      13.24   239 16.21 14.16        10.17 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf1   16.38 15.62       11.8 10800 16.40 12.96         7.63 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf3   16.44 13.83       9.72 10800 16.48  9.67         5.19 10800
                   tc1c20s4cf4   17.00 17.00      13.17   215 17.87 14.83         9.41 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct1   18.02 17.17      12.59 10800 18.45 13.64         7.65 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct3   14.43 13.34       9.52 10800 14.43 10.41         5.23 10800
                   tc1c20s4ct4   17.00 17.00      12.78   626 18.36 14.41        10.02 10800
                   tc2c20s3cf0       -     -      11.18 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s3ct0   25.79 20.90      10.91 10800 25.84 10.17         1.95 10800
                   tc2c20s4cf0       -     -      11.02 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                   tc2c20s4ct0       -     -      10.87 10800     -     -         1.94 10800




                                                        55
Table 14: Detailed computational results on the 20-customer instances for the CS replication-based models
(β  4)

                     Instance
                                                 r
                                                CS rep
                                               FArc          s                    r
                                                                             CS rep
                                                                            FN ode          s
                                    Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s) Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                     tc0c20s3cf2       -     -      14.89 10800     -     -         6.89 10800
                     tc0c20s3ct2   17.08 14.96      11.63 10800 17.31 12.19         6.96 10800
                     tc0c20s4cf2       -     -      14.54 10800     -     -         6.86 10800
                     tc0c20s4ct2   16.99 14.63      10.87 10800 17.72 10.16         6.62 10800
                     tc1c20s3cf1   17.49 16.94      13.91 10800 17.49 14.25         8.02 10800
                     tc1c20s3cf3   16.44 13.99       9.72 10800 16.95  9.36         5.19 10800
                     tc1c20s3cf4   17.00 17.00      13.21   126 17.00 16.82         9.41 10800
                     tc1c20s3ct1   18.94 18.42      14.73 10800 19.68 14.93         8.02 10800
                     tc1c20s3ct3   12.60 12.60       9.24  4177 12.67  9.29         5.45 10800
                     tc1c20s3ct4   16.21 16.21      13.14   357 16.23 13.70        10.17 10800
                     tc1c20s4cf1   16.38 15.17       11.8 10800 16.38 12.91         7.63 10800
                     tc1c20s4cf3   16.80 13.41       9.72 10800 16.89 10.30         5.19 10800
                     tc1c20s4cf4   17.00 17.00      13.17   463 17.00 14.99         9.41 10800
                     tc1c20s4ct1   17.81 16.60      12.59 10800 17.87 13.73         7.65 10800
                     tc1c20s4ct3   14.43 13.28       9.51 10800 14.50 10.40         5.23 10800
                     tc1c20s4ct4   17.00 17.00      12.78   876 17.17 14.31        10.02 10800
                     tc2c20s3cf0       -     -      11.18 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                     tc2c20s3ct0   25.79 20.85      10.91 10800 26.24 10.13         1.95 10800
                     tc2c20s4cf0       -     -      11.02 10800     -     -         2.03 10800
                     tc2c20s4ct0       -     -      10.87 10800     -     -         1.94 10800



F.1.2     Path-based model


        Table 15: Detailed computational results on the 10-customer instances for the path-based model

                                   Instance          #CSPs
                                                                       r     s
                                                                          P ath
                                                                         FArc
                                                              Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                                   tc0c10s2cf1         197   19.75 19.75      12.26    11
                                   tc0c10s2ct1         245   12.30 12.30        9.36   10
                                   tc0c10s3cf1         197   19.75 19.75      12.26    11
                                   tc0c10s3ct1         358   10.80 10.80        8.25    7
                                   tc1c10s2cf2         192    9.03  9.03        6.81    4
                                   tc1c10s2cf3         204   16.37 16.37      11.26    56
                                   tc1c10s2cf4         253   16.10 16.10      12.74    10
                                   tc1c10s2ct2         283   10.75 10.75        6.99  118
                                   tc1c10s2ct3         249   13.17 13.17        9.01    4
                                   tc1c10s2ct4         259   13.83 13.83      11.15     4
                                   tc1c10s3cf2         192    9.03  9.03        6.81    4
                                   tc1c10s3cf3         218   16.37 16.37      11.25    48
                                   tc1c10s3cf4         336   14.90 14.90      11.17    13
                                   tc1c10s3ct2         448    9.20  9.20        6.61   45
                                   tc1c10s3ct3         350   13.02 13.02        7.33   27
                                   tc1c10s3ct4         317   13.21 13.21        8.99   10
                                   tc2c10s2cf0         238   21.77 21.77      10.96   348
                                   tc2c10s2ct0         265   12.45 12.45        4.94  794
                                   tc2c10s3cf0         238   21.77 21.77      10.96   350
                                   tc2c10s3ct0         366   11.51 11.51        4.41 2716




                                                                 56
       Table 16: Detailed computational results on the 20-customer instances for the path-based model

                                 Instance      #CSPs
                                                                 rFArc
                                                                   P ath
                                                                         s
                                                        Obj Bound LP Bound Time (s)
                                 tc0c20s3cf2     939   27.49  22.9    15.34  10800
                                 tc0c20s3ct2    1284   17.08 14.93    11.66  10800
                                 tc0c20s4cf2    1036   27.47 22.97    15.34  10800
                                 tc0c20s4ct2    1350   16.99 14.98    11.40  10800
                                 tc1c20s3cf1    1189   17.49 17.13    14.08  10800
                                 tc1c20s3cf3    1491   16.48 13.28     9.92  10800
                                 tc1c20s3cf4    1257   17.00 17.00    14.95    111
                                 tc1c20s3ct1    1255   18.94 18.55    14.98  10800
                                 tc1c20s3ct3    1373   12.60 12.60     9.39   1529
                                 tc1c20s3ct4    1104   16.21 16.21    13.91    163
                                 tc1c20s4cf1    1304   16.38 16.05    12.58  10800
                                 tc1c20s4cf3    1607   16.84 13.19     9.92  10800
                                 tc1c20s4cf4    1322   17.00 17.00    14.69    134
                                 tc1c20s4ct1    1516   18.02 16.67    13.72  10800
                                 tc1c20s4ct3    1645   14.43 13.60     9.69  10800
                                 tc1c20s4ct4    1330   17.00 17.00    14.54    506
                                 tc2c20s3cf0    1437   24.68 18.31    11.95  10800
                                 tc2c20s3ct0    1318   25.80 21.29    11.74  10800
                                 tc2c20s4cf0    1353   24.67 17.78    11.81  10800
                                 tc2c20s4ct0    1195   26.02 20.45    11.46  10800



F.2     FRVCP
The average CPU time reported in column “Time (ms)” in the following tables is in milliseconds and rounded
up to the nearest tenth.

Table 17: Computational results for the different algorithms on 29,443 routes according to the number of CSs

|F | Algorithm          #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)               |F | Algorithm         #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)
2     MILP PATH           440  440 0.000%       14.2              8    MILP PATH          5316 5316 0.000%     178.4
      LABEL               440  440 0.000%        0.8                   LABEL              5316 5316 0.000%        0.7
      HEURISTIC           440  435 0.006%        0.3                   HEURISTIC          5225 4466 0.174%        0.3
      HEURISTIC M2017     418  339 0.599%        0.2                   HEURISTIC M2017    4412 3221 1.453%        0.2
3     MILP PATH          1569 1569 0.000%       27.7              12   MILP PATH          3218 3218 0.000%       76.6
      LABEL              1569 1569 0.000%        0.7                   LABEL              3218 3218 0.000%        1.0
      HEURISTIC          1559 1475 0.055%        0.3                   HEURISTIC          3202 2687 0.199%        0.3
      HEURISTIC M2017    1498 1229 0.692%        0.2                   HEURISTIC M2017    2996 2110 0.959%        0.2
4     MILP PATH          1079 1079 0.000%       27.1              16   MILP PATH          7861 7861 0.000%       69.0
      LABEL              1079 1079 0.000%        0.7                   LABEL              7861 7861 0.000%        0.9
      HEURISTIC          1078 1047 0.025%        0.3                   HEURISTIC          7613 5971 0.236%        0.2
      HEURISTIC M2017    1046  876 0.807%        0.1                   HEURISTIC M2017    6424 4894 0.690%        0.2
5     MILP PATH          1982 1982 0.000%       24.0              24   MILP PATH          7978 7978 0.000%     123.1
      LABEL              1982 1982 0.000%        0.6                   LABEL              7978 7978 0.000%        1.5
      HEURISTIC          1948 1763 0.154%        0.2                   HEURISTIC          7750 5948 0.228%        0.3
      HEURISTIC M2017    1737 1422 0.903%        0.1                   HEURISTIC M2017    6867 5013 0.534%        0.3




                                                           57
Table 18: Computational results for the different algorithms on 29,443 routes according to the number of nodes
in the initial route (including the depot at the beginning and at the end)

| p q| Algorithm
 n Π                        #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)         |npΠq| Algorithm         #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)
3        MILP PATH             58   58 0.000%       19.7        10    MILP PATH           5828 5828 0.000%       99.9
         LABEL                 58   58 0.000%        0.5              LABEL               5828 5828 0.000%        1.0
         HEURISTIC             58   51 0.285%        0.1              HEURISTIC           5631 4427 0.193%        0.2
         HEURISTIC M2017       58   49 0.926%        0.1              HEURISTIC M2017     4843 3505 0.541%        0.2
4        MILP PATH            298  298 0.000%       23.4        11    MILP PATH           4991 4991 0.000%     166.6
         LABEL                298  298 0.000%        0.6              LABEL               4991 4991 0.000%        1.0
         HEURISTIC            298  278 0.090%        0.2              HEURISTIC           4905 4250 0.105%        0.2
         HEURISTIC M2017      292  246 1.303%        0.1              HEURISTIC M2017     4640 3658 0.284%        0.2
5        MILP PATH            710  710 0.000%       29.4        12    MILP PATH           3942 3942 0.000%       77.5
         LABEL                710  710 0.000%        0.7              LABEL               3942 3942 0.000%        1.1
         HEURISTIC            706  613 0.250%        0.2              HEURISTIC           3907 3579 0.040%        0.3
         HEURISTIC M2017      678  512 2.028%        0.1              HEURISTIC M2017     3813 3322 0.139%        0.2
6        MILP PATH           1227 1227 0.000%       43.6        13    MILP PATH           1523 1523 0.000%       77.5
         LABEL               1227 1227 0.000%        0.9              LABEL               1523 1523 0.000%        1.2
         HEURISTIC           1193 1010 0.298%        0.3              HEURISTIC           1515 1441 0.023%        0.2
         HEURISTIC M2017     1158  825 2.431%        0.2              HEURISTIC M2017     1501 1425 0.020%        0.2
7        MILP PATH           2084 2084 0.000%       59.5        14    MILP PATH            318  318 0.000%       55.2
         LABEL               2084 2084 0.000%        0.9              LABEL                318  318 0.000%        1.3
         HEURISTIC           2051 1648 0.291%        0.3              HEURISTIC            317  306 0.012%        0.2
         HEURISTIC M2017     1825 1159 1.911%        0.2              HEURISTIC M2017      318  301 0.012%        0.2
8        MILP PATH           3411 3411 0.000%       76.8        15    MILP PATH             23   23 0.000%       16.8
         LABEL               3411 3411 0.000%        0.9              LABEL                 23   23 0.000%        1.9
         HEURISTIC           3318 2543 0.309%        0.3              HEURISTIC             23   22 0.007%        0.2
         HEURISTIC M2017     2571 1659 1.753%        0.2              HEURISTIC M2017       23   23 0.000%        0.2
9        MILP PATH           5030 5030 0.000%     104.0
         LABEL               5030 5030 0.000%        0.9
         HEURISTIC           4893 3624 0.314%        0.3
         HEURISTIC M2017     3678 2420 1.077%        0.2



F.3       FRVCP 1
The average CPU time reported in column “Time (ms)” in the following tables is in milliseconds and rounded
up to the nearest tenth.

Table 19: Computational results for the different algorithms on 29,443 routes according to the number of CSs

    | | Algorithm
     F                 #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)               |F | Algorithm     #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)
    2    MILP PATH 1     440  440 0.000%        9.9              8    MILP PATH 1    5316 5316 0.000%       23.1
         LABEL 1         440  440 0.000%        0.3                   LABEL 1        5316 5316 0.000%        0.3
         MILP M2017      440  440 0.000%       13.1                   MILP M2017     5316 5316 0.000%       39.2
    3    MILP PATH 1    1569 1569 0.000%       14.4              12   MILP PATH 1    3218 3218 0.000%       30.2
         LABEL 1        1569 1569 0.000%        0.4                   LABEL 1        3218 3218 0.000%        0.5
         MILP M2017     1569 1569 0.000%       19.7                   MILP M2017     3218 3218 0.000%       57.6
    4    MILP PATH 1    1079 1079 0.000%       14.8              16   MILP PATH 1    7861 7861 0.000%       31.7
         LABEL 1        1079 1079 0.000%        0.3                   LABEL 1        7861 7861 0.000%        0.6
         MILP M2017     1079 1079 0.000%       21.4                   MILP M2017     7861 7861 0.000%       58.4
    5    MILP PATH 1    1982 1982 0.000%       14.0              24   MILP PATH 1    7978 7978 0.000%       43.5
         LABEL 1        1982 1982 0.000%        0.3                   LABEL 1        7978 7978 0.000%        1.0
         MILP M2017     1982 1982 0.000%       23.3                   MILP M2017     7978 7978 0.000%       82.8




                                                           58
Table 20: Computational results for the different algorithms on 29,443 routes according to the number of nodes
in the initial route (including the depot at the beginning and at the end)

 |npΠq| Algorithm    #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)              |npΠq| Algorithm     #Feas #Opt  Gap   Time (ms)
 3     MILP PATH 1      58   58 0.000%        8.1             10     MILP PATH 1    5828 5828 0.000%       33.4
       LABEL 1          58   58 0.000%        0.2                    LABEL 1        5828 5828 0.000%        0.6
       MILP M2017       58   58 0.000%       14.1                    MILP M2017     5828 5828 0.000%       64.9
 4     MILP PATH 1     298  298 0.000%        9.0             11     MILP PATH 1    4991 4991 0.000%       36.3
       LABEL 1         298  298 0.000%        0.2                    LABEL 1        4991 4991 0.000%        0.7
       MILP M2017      298  298 0.000%       18.7                    MILP M2017     4991 4991 0.000%       53.7
 5     MILP PATH 1     710  710 0.000%       11.1             12     MILP PATH 1    3942 3942 0.000%       36.7
       LABEL 1         710  710 0.000%        0.2                    LABEL 1        3942 3942 0.000%        0.8
       MILP M2017      710  710 0.000%       28.6                    MILP M2017     3942 3942 0.000%       38.1
 6     MILP PATH 1    1227 1227 0.000%       14.1             13     MILP PATH 1    1523 1523 0.000%       33.4
       LABEL 1        1227 1227 0.000%        0.3                    LABEL 1        1523 1523 0.000%        0.9
       MILP M2017     1227 1227 0.000%       41.3                    MILP M2017     1523 1523 0.000%       22.2
 7     MILP PATH 1    2084 2084 0.000%       19.6             14     MILP PATH 1     318  318 0.000%       30.8
       LABEL 1        2084 2084 0.000%        0.4                    LABEL 1         318  318 0.000%        1.0
       MILP M2017     2084 2084 0.000%       58.7                    MILP M2017      318  318 0.000%       17.1
 8     MILP PATH 1    3411 3411 0.000%       24.7             15     MILP PATH 1      23   23 0.000%       13.8
       LABEL 1        3411 3411 0.000%        0.4                    LABEL 1          23   23 0.000%        0.8
       MILP M2017     3411 3411 0.000%       67.6                    MILP M2017       23   23 0.000%        5.5
 9     MILP PATH 1    5030 5030 0.000%       30.2
       LABEL 1        5030 5030 0.000%        0.5
       MILP M2017     5030 5030 0.000%       70.3



F.4     E-VRP-NL

Table 21: New BKS obtained for the E-VRP-NL by applying the labeling algorithm on each route of the
solutions reported by Montoya et al. (2017)

                                         Instance      Old BKS New BKS
                                         tc0c40s8cf0     31.282   31.045
                                         tc2c40s8cf2     27.147   27.141
                                         tc2c40s5cf2     27.543   27.536
                                         tc0c80s8cf1     45.227   45.225
                                         tc1c80s12cf2    29.544   29.532
                                         tc2c80s8cf4     49.287   49.171
                                         tc2c80s8ct3     32.315   32.312
                                         tc0c160s16cf4   82.924   82.863
                                         tc0c160s16ct4   82.365   82.323
                                         tc0c160s24ct4   80.956   80.796
                                         tc0c160s24cf4   81.442   81.380
                                         tc1c160s16cf3   71.757   71.509
                                         tc1c160s24cf3   68.558   68.512
                                         tc1c320s24cf2  152.131  152.063
                                         tc1c320s24cf3  117.475  117.462
                                         tc1c320s38cf2  141.631  141.620
                                         tc1c320s38ct3  116.075  116.065
                                         tc2c320s24cf0  182.454  182.453
                                         tc2c320s24ct4  121.936  121.820
                                         tc2c320s38cf4  122.325  122.318
                                         tc2c320s38ct0  190.974  190.963
                                         tc2c320s38ct1   94.534   94.533
                                         tc2c320s38ct4  121.662  121.657




                                                       59
