           The electric vehicle routing problem with capacitated
                              charging stations
                  Aurélien Froger, Ola Jabali, Jorge E. Mendoza, Gilbert Laporte



      To cite this version:
     Aurélien Froger, Ola Jabali, Jorge E. Mendoza, Gilbert Laporte. The electric vehicle routing problem with
     capacitated charging stations. Transportation Science, 2022, 56 (2), pp.460-482. ⟨10.1287/trsc.2021.1111⟩. ⟨hal-
     02386167v3⟩




                                        HAL Id: hal-02386167
                              https://hal.science/hal-02386167v3
                                           Submitted on 31 Dec 2021




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.


                                              HAL Authorization
      The electric vehicle routing problem with capacitated charging
                                                               stations
        Aurélien Froger1                  Ola Jabali2              Jorge E. Mendoza3                  Gilbert Laporte3,4

           1
               Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, IMB, UMR 5251, Inria Bordeaux Sud-Ouest, Talence, France
                    2
                        Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
                                                    3
                                                        HEC Montréal, Montréal, Canada
                                   4
                                       School of Management, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom




                                                                 Abstract

          Electric vehicle routing problems (E-VRPs) deal with routing a fleet of electric vehicles (EVs) to serve a
      set of customers, while minimizing an operational criterion, e.g., cost or time. The feasibility of the routes
      is constrained by the autonomy of the EVs, which may be recharged along the route. Much of the E-VRP
      research neglects the capacity of charging stations (CSs), and thus implicitly assumes that an unlimited
      number of EVs can be simultaneously charged at a CS. In this paper, we model and solve E-VRPs considering
      these capacity restrictions. In particular, we study an E-VRP with non-linear charging functions, multiple
      charging technologies, en route charging, and variable charging quantities, while explicitly accounting for
      the number of chargers available at privately managed CSs. We refer to this problem as the E-VRP with
      non-linear charging functions and capacitated stations (E-VRP-NL-C). We introduce a continuous-time
      model formulation for the problem. We then introduce an algorithmic framework that iterates between
      two main components: 1) The route generator, which uses an iterated local search algorithm to build a
      pool of high-quality routes and 2) The solution assembler, which applies a branch-and-cut algorithm to
      combine a subset of routes from the pool into a solution satisfying the capacity constraints. We compare
      four assembly strategies on a set of instances. We show that our algorithm effectively deals with the E-
      VRP-NL-C. Furthermore, considering the uncapacitated version of the E-VRP-NL-C, our solution method
      identifies new best-known solutions for 80 out of 120 instances.

    Keywords— Electric vehicle routing; non-linear charging function; synchronization constraints; mixed integer linear
programming; matheuristic; iterated local search; branch-and-cut



1     Introduction
In recent years, competitive prices and technological advances have made electric vehicles (EVs) an attractive alternative
to internal combustion engine-powered vehicles for logistics operations (Juan et al., 2016; Pelletier et al., 2016). To allow
companies and private vehicle users to fully integrate EVs in their operations and their trips, the operations research
community has turned its attention to EV route planing. The resulting literature can be divided into two streams:
optimal path and vehicle routing problems. As the name suggests, the first stream focuses on problems in which the
objective is to find an optimal path from an origin to a destination on a road network, while taking into account the
EV’s short driving range and accommodating stops at charging stations (CSs) to recharge the vehicle’s battery. These
problems are out of the scope of this paper, but we refer the reader to the works of Baum et al. (2019) and Baum et al.
(2020) for a thorough literature review and a state-of-the-art results for these problems. We focus on the second stream,
namely, electric vehicle routing problems (E-VRPs).


                                                                      1
   E-VRPs consist of designing routes to serve a set of customers using a fleet of EVs. Due to their relatively short
driving range, EVs may need to detour to CSs to replenish their battery. This is especially critical in the context of
mid-haul or long-haul routing (Schiffer et al., 2018b; Villegas et al., 2018). Therefore, key decisions in E-VRPs concern
not only the assignment of the customers to the vehicles and their sequencing, but also where and how much to charge
the vehicles.
   One of the main modeling elements in E-VRPs is the charging process of batteries. Some studies assume that EVs
are fully recharged whenever they detour to a CS. That is the case, for instance, in the green vehicle routing problem
(G-VRP). The G-VRP was introduced by Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012) and tackled by Koç and Karaoglan (2016),
Montoya et al. (2016), Andelmin and Bartolini (2017), and Bruglieri et al. (2019a), among others. One of the main
assumptions in the G-VRP is that the charging time is constant, meaning that the vehicle takes a fixed amount of time to
charge the battery to its full capacity, independently of the initial state of charge (SoC). Authors such as Schneider et al.
(2014) and Hiermann et al. (2016) relaxed this assumption and incorporated charging times that linearly depend on the
SoC upon arrival at the CS. As Montoya et al. (2017) pointed out, the full charge policy may lead to unnecessary out-of-
the-depot charging, which translates into expensive driver idling time and overpriced energy purchases. To overcome this
drawback, several researchers have studied problem variants in which the charging time is a decision variable; notable
examples include the work of Felipe et al. (2014) Desaulniers et al. (2016), Montoya et al. (2017), Keskin and Çatay
(2018), and Froger et al. (2019). In the first two examples, the authors assume that the charge retrieved at a CS is
a linear function of the charging time. In reality, however, the battery charging process follows a non-linear function
with respect to time (Pelletier et al. (2017)). To account for this, Montoya et al. (2017), Koç et al. (2018), and Froger
et al. (2019) modeled the charging process using concave piecewise linear functions, whereas Lee (2020) considered a
general concave and non-decreasing charging function. In the resulting problem, known as the electric vehicle routing
problem with non-linear charging function (E-VRP-NL), the charging times no longer rely solely on the quantity of
energy charged but also on the initial SoC of the EV.
   In all the previously discussed research, the authors assume that CSs are always available to charge a vehicle, thus,
implicitly assuming that CSs are uncapacitated and can simultaneously charge an unlimited number of EVs. In practice,
however, each CS has a fixed and often small number of chargers. The intuition behind neglecting the CS capacity
constraints is that accounting for the detour and charging times (or costs) while planning the routes is enough to capture
the impact of the charging decisions on the cost and feasibility of solutions. Nonetheless, the long charging times (which
may range from tens of minutes to several hours) and the small number of chargers typically available at CSs may
generate congestion.
   The nature of the congestion problem at CSs largely depends on the access options available to the fleet operator.
For instance, a few networks of public (as in accessible to anyone) CSs allow for charging time reservations. In this
case, congestion may be neglected and the fleet operator only needs to make sure that routes reach the CSs within
the reserved time windows. To accurately model the availability of each charger at a CS, the fleet operator may also
manage their allocation to the EVs within the reserved time windows (see for instance Bruglieri et al. (2019b) for an
example). In practice, most public charging stations do not allow for reservations. In this case, the exact time at
which EVs can access CSs is uncertain. Indeed, upon arrival, the chargers may be busy and the vehicle may have to
wait in a queue or detour to a close by station. Keskin et al. (2019) dealt with this issue by explicitly considering
expected (i.e., deterministic) time-dependent queuing times at CSs. Kullman et al. (2021) went a step further and
proposed dynamic optimization policies that constantly adapt charging and routing decisions depending on the state of
CS queues. Although these authors demonstrated that their approaches can effectively handle CS access uncertainty,
as Villegas et al. (2018) pointed out, most companies are unwilling to bear this risk, and thus decide to install their
own private out-of-depot charging infrastructure (e.g., at satellite depots, company office branches, or exclusive-access
parking spots in city centers).
   Relying on a privately operated charging infrastructure only changes the nature of the congestion problem, but does
not solve it. To illustrate this point, we ran a feasibility test on the 120 best-known solutions (BKSs) for the E-VRP-NL
reported in Montoya et al. (2017) limiting the number of chargers per CS to one, two, three, and four. According to
our results, 55 of the BKSs become infeasible if there is only one charger per CS. This figure drops to 23 and three for



                                                             2
the cases with two and three chargers. The only scenario where all BKSs are feasible is when CSs have four chargers
(see Appendix A for details). Intuitively, one may think that by merely shifting the starting time of the charging
operations, the feasibility problem will be solved. However, our experiments show that this is not only unnecessarily
expensive (albeit with a very limited time increase), but more importantly it may be infeasible. Another option to
mitigate the effects of congestion is to increase the number of chargers installed at each CS, but this may not be a
viable solution in practice. Indeed, Gnann et al. (2018) predict that by the end of 2020, the purchase and installation
costs of a fast charging point (i.e., power rates above 22 kW) will be around 40,000e and its annual operation cost will
reach 4,000e. Thus, if a company decides to invest in out-of-the-depot charging infrastructure, there is little chance
that it will decide to install more than a couple of chargers at each CS. In conclusion, we argue that in most practical
situations, the congestion at the CSs should be taken into account when planning the routes by explicitly modeling the
capacity constraints.
   We are aware of two works taking into account CS capacity constraints when optimizing routing decisions in the
context of a private charging infrastructure. Bruglieri et al. (2019b) considered the G-VRP with capacitated alternative
fuel stations (G-VRP-CAFS) as an extension of the G-VRP to account for the number of pumps at every refueling
station. They introduced a path-based formulation and solved it using a cutting plane algorithm where the capacity
constraints are separated when needed. To model the capacity constraints, the non-dominated paths between fuel
stations are replicated according to the number of fueling pumps at the origin and destination of the paths. The authors
reported optimal solutions on instances up to 20 customers. Bruglieri et al. (2021) tackled the same problem and
proposed an improved path-based formulation that does not require path replication and solved it by a cutting plane
algorithm. The capacity constraints are modeled using Helly’s theorem in dimension one. Instances with up to 30
customers and four pumps at fuel stations are optimally solved. Out of the field of vehicle routing, some researchers
have studied related problems. For instance, Sassi and Oulamara (2014) and Pelletier et al. (2018) considered the
problem of scheduling charging operations at the depot, assuming that the routes are given as an input. Both papers
considered not only constraints on the number of available chargers, but also electricity grid constraints limiting the
amount of power that can be drawn from the electric grid at any given time. The latter is typically a binding constraint
for central depots with a large number of available chargers, but is usually not a concern for CSs since they are designed
to operate at full capacity. Brandstätter et al. (2020) studied the problem of finding optimal locations and sizes for
charging stations based on the number of expected trips. They explicitly took charging station capacity into account
using a time-expanded location graph.
   In order to help the readers find their way through the different assumptions, Table 1 summarizes the main E-VRPs
variants addressed in the literature (it excludes the literature on location-routing problems). The table is not exhaustive,
but it provides a good overview of the current state of the research on E-VRPs.
   In this paper we introduce the E-VRP-NL with capacitated CSs (E-VRP-NL-C). The problem extends classical E-
VRPs to account for the fixed number of chargers available at each CS. We assume that the CSs are privately operated.
There are some key differences between the E-VRP-NL-C and the G-VRP-CAFS studied in Bruglieri et al. (2019b)
and Bruglieri et al. (2021). The G-VRP-CAFS assumes that every EV is fully charged in constant time when it stops
at a CS, whereas the quantity of energy charged during every stop at a CS is a decision variable in the E-VRP-NL-C.
Moreover, since the charging functions are piecewise linear in the latter problem, the charging time of an EV depends
on its initial SoC and on the quantity of energy charged.
   The E-VRP-NL-C is a complex combined routing-scheduling problem belonging to the family of VRPs with syn-
chronization constraints. More specifically, according to the taxonomy introduced by Drexl (2012), the E-VRP-NL-C
belongs to the class of VRPs with resource synchronization, where vehicles compete to access scarce resources (i.e., the
chargers at every CS). The E-VRP-NL-C shares similarities with problems where vehicles need to wait while the loading
equipment is busy. Examples of problems in this class include the log truck scheduling problem (El Hachemi et al., 2013;
Rix et al., 2015) and routing and scheduling problems arising in public works (Grimault et al., 2017). The E-VRP-NL-C
also relates to VRPs with inter-tour resource constraints. In these problems, the scarce resources are located only at
the terminal vertex of the routes (i.e., the depot). An example of a problem in this category is the VRP introduced by
Hempsch and Irnich (2008), where there is a limited number of ramps at the depot, and therefore only a fixed number



                                                             3
                                              Table 1: Summary of the literature on E-VRPs

                                             Charging infrastructure            Charging process

Reference                                                            Multiple   Partial              Fleet          Model(s)              Main solution method(s)
                                      Congestion | Accessibility                          Function
                                                                      speed     policy

Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012)                  NEG                                        C         H             CS-Repl                       Heuristics

Felipe et al. (2014)                              NEG                   X            X       L         H             CS-Repl              Local-search algorithms, SA

Schneider et al. (2014)                           NEG                                        L         H             CS-Repl                    Hybrid VNS/TS

Goeke and Schneider (2015)                        NEG                                        L         M             CS-Repl                         ALNS

Schneider et al. (2015)                           NEG                                       C/L        H             CS-Repl                         AVNS

Desaulniers et al. (2016)                         NEG                                X       L         H               SP                      Branch-and-price1

Hiermann et al. (2016)                            NEG                                        L         M           CS-Repl, SP         Branch-and-price, extended ALNS

Keskin and Çatay (2016)                          NEG                                X       L         H             CS-Repl                         ALNS

Koç and Karaoglan (2016)                         NEG                                        C         H       CS-Repl, CS-Path-1                   B&C, SA

Montoya et al. (2016)                             NEG                                        C         H                -                Multi-space sampling heuristic

Andelmin and Bartolini (2017)                     NEG                                        C         H          SP (CS-Path)             Two-phase exact algorithm

Leggieri and Haouari (2017)                       NEG                                        C         H       CS-Repl, CS-Path-1                 MILP solver

Montoya et al. (2017)                             NEG                   X            X       PL        H             CS-Repl                Matheuristic (ILS + SP)

Keskin and Çatay (2018)                          NEG                   X            X       L         H             CS-Repl             Matheuristic (extended ALNS)

Andelmin and Bartolini (2019)                     NEG                                        C         H             CS-Path            Multi-start local search heuristic

Bruglieri et al. (2019c)                          NEG                                        C         H      CS-Path-1, CS-Path-2                MILP solver

Bruglieri et al. (2019a)                          NEG                                        C         H         Customer-Path             MILP solver, Matheuristic

Bruglieri et al. (2019b)                   SCH | PUB-R/PO                                    C         H     CS-Repl, Customer-Path          Cutting plane method

Froger et al. (2019)                              NEG                   X            X       PL        H        CS-Repl, CS-Path                  MILP solver

Hiermann et al. (2019)                            NEG                                X       L         M                -               Matheuristic (GA + LNS + SP)

Keskin et al. (2019)                          DWT | PUB                              X       PL        H             CS-Repl             Matheuristic (extended ALNS)

Macrina et al. (2019)                             NEG                   X            X       L         M             CS-Repl                           ILS

Lee (2020)                                        NEG                                X       Cv       SV     CS-Repl, Customer-Path             Branch-and-price

Bruglieri et al. (2021)                    SCH | PUB-R/PO                                    C         H         Customer-Path               Cutting plane method

Kullman et al. (2021)                       DYN | PUB/PO                X            X       PL       SV             CS-Repl              Static and dynamic policies

Our research                                   SCH | PO                 X            X       PL        H             CS-Path               Matheuristic (ILS + B&C)
1 Improved results can be found in Desaulniers et al. (2020)



     • Charging infrastructure:

             –   Strategy to deal with congestion at CSs and accessibility of CSs (Congestion | Accessibility): neglected (NEG), scheduling of charging operations
                 according to the number of available chargers (SCH), deterministic time-dependent waiting times (DWT), dynamic decision making (DYN) |
                 public (PUB) –accessible to anyone, public with reservation (PUB-R), privately operated (PO)

             –   Multiple speed: each station may charge at a different speed (e.g., fast, moderate, slow)


     • Charging process:

             –   Partial policy: the quantity of energy charged is a decision

             –   Function: constant charging time (C), charging times linearly depending on the quantity of energy charged (L), charging times depending on the
                 quantity of energy charged and on the initial SoC: concave piecewise linear charging function (PL), concave and non-decreasing charging function
                 (Cv)


     • Fleet: homogeneous (H), mixed (M), single vehicle (SV)


     • Model(s): CS replication-based formulation (CS-Repl), path-based formulation in which each path corresponds to a sequence of stops at CSs between
        customers and/or the depot (CS-Path), CS-Path in which every path contains at most one stop (CS-Path-1) or two stops at a CS (CS-Path-2), path-based
        formulation in which each path corresponds to a sequence of visits to customers between CSs and/or the depot (Customer-Path), classical set partitioning
        with a variable per route (SP)


     • Methods: simulated annealing (SA), variable neighborhood search (VNS), tabu search (TS), adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS), branch-and-cut
        (B&C), adaptive VNS (AVNS), iterated local search (ILS), genetic algorithm (GA)




                                                                                 4
of vehicles can be served simultaneously. The problem that is most closely related to the E-VRP-NL-C is the VRP
with location congestion introduced by Lam and Van Hentenryck (2016). In this problem, each customer has a given
number of requests and a limited number of resources (e.g., conveyors). When a vehicle arrives at a customer location,
it must wait until at least one resource becomes available to handle the shipping. However, there exist two fundamental
differences between their problem and our E-VRP-NL-C. The first is that in our problem, visiting locations with limited
resources (the CSs) is needed for feasibility reasons. As a consequence, not only the number, but also the location and
duration of the charging operations depend on the configuration of the routes. In other words, the tasks that must be
synchronized are not known a priori. The second difference is that in contrast to their problem, in our E-VRP-NL-C,
the task synchronization has a direct impact on the solution cost.
    The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we propose a mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation
for the E-VRP-NL-C, showing how CS capacity constraints can be integrated into a standard E-VRP model. Our MILP
formulation does not require node replication. It models the capacity constraints in a new way with respect to the
modeling approach used in Bruglieri et al. (2019b) and Bruglieri et al. (2021) for the GVRP-CAFS. In particular, we
model the capacity constraints using sequencing variables and flow variables and constraints. Second, we introduce a
framework to solve E-VRPs with CS capacity constraints in general, and the E-VRP-NL-C in particular. It is made
up of two interacting components: a route generator and a solution assembler. The first component builds a set of
high-quality solutions, while relaxing the capacity constraints. The routes making up these solutions are stored in a
pool which is sent to the assembler every few iterations. The latter combines routes from the pool in an attempt to
build a solution meeting the capacity constraints. If such a solution does not exist or cannot be found within a given
computing time, the assembler sends a signal to the generator to modify the search space in order to favor feasibility.
For the particular case of the E-VRP-NL-C, we have developed a route generator based on a new and efficient iterated
local search (ILS) for the E-VRP-NL, and a solution assembler based on branch-and-cut. More specifically, while solving
a route selection problem, we discard, by means of cuts, selections of routes that lead to a violation of the capacity
constraints or subset of routes for which the total time is underestimated. We present four assembly strategies allowing
for different tradeoffs between efficiency and effectiveness. We have carried out extensive computational experiments on
a set of instances with different characteristics adapted from available benchmarks. The results demonstrate that our
approach can handle the CS capacity constraints effectively and can tackle large instances with up to 320 customers. In
addition, we report new BKS for 80 out of the 120 instances of a well-established benchmark set for the closely related
E-VRP-NL.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formally introduces the E-VRP-NL-C. Section 3
describes a MILP formulation of the problem. Section 4 presents the proposed solution method. Section 5 shows the
computational results. Finally, Section 6 concludes and outlines research perspectives.



2     Problem description
We define the E-VRP-NL-C as follows. Let I be the set of customers that need to be served and let F be the set of
CSs at which recharging can take place. The CSs are privately operated, meaning that there is no uncertainty on their
availability. Each customer i P I has a service time gi . The customers are served using a homogeneous fleet of EVs.
Each EV has a battery of capacity Q (expressed in Wh). At the beginning of the planning horizon, the EVs are located
in a single depot, from which they leave fully charged. The depot is continuously open for Tmax hours. Traveling from
one location i (the depot, a customer, or a CS) to another location j incurs a driving time tij ě 0 that corresponds to
the shortest path in time from i to j and an energy consumption eij ě 0 associated to this path.
    Due to their limited battery capacity, EVs may need to stop en route at CSs. Charging operations can occur at
any CS, they are non-preemptive, and EVs can be partially recharged. The CS j P F has a concave piecewise linear
charging function φj that maps for an empty battery the time spent charging at j and the SoC of the vehicle upon
departing from j. If q is the SoC of the EV upon arrival at j and ∆ is the charging time, then the SoC of the EV upon
departure from j is given by φj p∆ ` φ´1
                                      j pqqq (Figure 1). We denote by Bj “ tpaj0 , qj0 q, . . . , pajbj , qjbj qu the totally

ordered set of breakpoints of the charging function at CS j, where every breakpoint is a (charging time, SoC) pair,



                                                             5
                              φj p∆ ` φ´1
                                       j pqqq




                                      SoC
                                            q




                                                         φ´1
                                                          j pqq    φ´1
                                                                    j pqq ` ∆

                                                                  Charging time


                            Figure 1: Piecewise linear charging function of a CS j P F .



sorted in non-decreasing order of time.
    Each CS j P F also has a capacity, given by the number of available chargers Cj . Due to the limited capacity of
CSs, vehicles may incur waiting times while they queue for a charger. We therefore note that optimal solutions are not
necessarily left-shifted schedules, as is the case for the E-VRP-NL and other E-VRP variants assuming uncapacitated
CSs.
    Feasible solutions to the E-VRP-NL-C must satisfy the following conditions: 1) each customer is visited exactly
once by a single vehicle, 2) each route starts at the depot not before time 0 and ends at the depot not later than time
Tmax , 3) each route is energy-feasible, i.e., the SoC of an EV when it enters and leaves from any location lies between
0 and Q, and 4) no more than Cj EVs simultaneously charge at each CS j P F . The objective of the E-VRP-NL-C is
to minimize the total time needed to serve all customers, including driving, service, charging, and waiting times. Note
that to avoid congestion at CSs, the starting times of the routes can be delayed at no cost. Moreover, an E-VRP-NL-C
instance may have no feasible solution.



3      A mixed-integer linear programming formulation
We can classify explicit the mixed integer linear programming formulations for E-VRPs into two categories: CS
replication-based formulations and path-based formulations. CS replication-based formulations are the compact MILP
formulations typically used in the E-VRP literature to mathematically define the problem and solve toy instances. As
their name suggests, in these formulations the nodes representing CSs are replicated and the number of stops at each
CS replication is constrained to one. Note that in this case the number of stops at a CS is limited to its number of
replications. This modeling artifice allows for tracking of the routes’ travel time, distance, and SoC whenever there are
several stops at the CS. To ensure that no optimal solution is cut off, the number of replications of each CS must be
very large. For instance, Froger et al. (2019) provided an example where this value is equal to 4|I|, when the congestion
at each CS is neglected. CS replication-based formulations yield intractable MILPs and introduce symmetry issues.
    Path-based formulations are based on a more intricate modeling strategy by which the problem is defined on a
multigraph. In a nutshell, in these formulations, the nodes represent locations (the depot and the CSs or the depot
and the customers) and the arcs represent possible paths between every pair of locations. A path may be defined as
a sequence (possibly empty) of visits to customers between two CSs or the depot (Bruglieri et al., 2019a,b) or as a
sequences of stops at CSs between two customers or the depot (Roberti and Wen, 2016; Andelmin and Bartolini, 2017;
Froger et al., 2019). We refer to the former case a as customer path and to the latter as a CS path. In both cases,
dominance rules are defined to limit the number of paths taken into consideration. These formulations no longer require
CS vertices replication.
    There also exist set partitioning-based formulations (see for instance Desaulniers et al. (2016)), but they are out of
the scope of this paper. Table 1 provides details on the formulations used in the E-VRP research.

    We introduce a path-based formulation for the E-VRP-NL-C. We decided to use CS paths rather than customer


                                                            6
paths for two reasons. First, the number of customer paths grows much faster than the number of CS paths. Second,
customer path-based formulations require introducing a sufficient number of clones of paths that do not visit any
customer between two CSs, whereas a CS path can at most be traveled by a single EV. We point out that the modeling
of the CS capacity constraints we introduce below can easily be adapted to customer path-based formulations.
   The concept of CS paths leads to a redefinition of the problem on a directed multigraph G “ pV, P q, where V “
t0u Y I, and P is the set of arcs connecting the vertices of V . An arc in P represents a CS path p, starting in vertex
orgppq visiting a sequence of CSs or none and ending in vertex destppq. We denote nppq the number of CSs in p. If nppq
is equal to 0, then p does not stop at any CS between orgppq and destppq. Otherwise, we denote by cspp, lq the l-th CS
visited in p (with l P t1, ..., nppqu). We define inputs eppq and tppq as the energy consumption (energy used to travel the
arcs of the path) and the driving time (time to travel the arcs of the path) initially associated with CS path p. Given
two vertices i, j P V , we define Pij as the set of CS paths connecting i to j.
   Our path-based formulation of the E-VRP-NL-C involves the following decisions variables. The binary variable xp is
1 if and only if an EV travels CS path p P P . The continuous variables τp and yp track the time and SoC of an EV when
it departs from vertex orgppq to destppq using CS path p. To model the charging process at cspp, lq, we introduce a
group of variables. The continuous variables q pl and q pl specify the SoC of an EV when it enters and leaves cspp, lq. For
k P Bi zt0u, the binary variables wplk and wplk are equal to 1 if and only if the SoC is between qcspp,lq,k´1 and qcspp,lq,k
when the EV enters and leaves cspp, lq. The variables apl and apl are the scaled arrival and departure times, according
to the charging function of cspp, lq. The continuous variables λplk and λplk represent the coefficients associated with
the breakpoints pacspp,lq,k , qcspp,lq,k q of the piecewise linear charging function, when the EV enters and leaves cspp, lq.
The continuous variable ∆pl and ∇pl represents the duration of the charging operation performed at cspp, lq and the
waiting time incurred before charging at this CS. Lastly, the continuous variables spl and spl represent the starting and
completion time of the charging operation performed at cspp, lq.
   To model the CS capacity constraints, we propose a flow-based formulation inspired from the one introduced by
Artigues et al. (2003) for the Resource Constrained Scheduling Problem. For every CS j P F , we consider Cj resources
(represented by the chargers). Each resource can execute at most one operation at any given time. For convenience,
we introduce the set Oj of potential charging operations at CS j. Every operation o P Oj represents a stop at j at a
specific position lpoq in a CS path going from orgpoq to destpoq. Although there may exist several CS paths between
two specific vertices that stop at j at the same position, at most one these CS paths can be selected in a solution.
We also introduce two dummy operations o`            ´
                                              j and oj , which act as the source and the sink of the flow for each CS j.
                                             ´
                                                                                             `        `
                                                                                                        ˘ `         ´
                                                                                                                       ˘
Specifically, the resources flow from o`                                                 1
                                       j to oj through the charging operations. Let po, o q P Oj Y toj u ˆ Oj Y toj u

be a couple of charging operations; then the continuous flow variable foo1 denotes the number of chargers that are
transferred from operation o to operation o1 . When both these operations are not dummy, foo1 is equal to one if and
only if these operations are scheduled on the same charger, o1 is scheduled after o, and no other operation is scheduled
on the charger between the completion of o and the beginning of o1 . Binary variable uoo1 is equal to 1 if and only if
operation o1 starts after the completion of operation o ‰ o1 . For notational convenience, we define Cpoq :“ 1 for all
o P Oj and Cpo`         ´
              j q :“ Cpoj q :“ Cj .

   A path-based formulation for the E-VRP-NL-C, denoted as rP path s, is as follows:
                               ˜          nppq
                                                           ¸
             path
                             ÿ            ÿ
          rF      s minimize     tppqxp `     p∆pl ` ∇pl q                                                                     (1)
                                pPP                  l“1
                                  ÿ       ÿ
                   subject to                   xp “ 1     iPI                                                                 (2)
                                jPV,i‰j pPPij
                                  ÿ       ÿ                ÿ    ÿ
                                                xp ´                   xp “ 0       iPV                                        (3)
                                jPV,i‰j pPPji          jPV,i‰j pPPij
                                                ˜                   nppq
                                                                                            ¸
                                  ÿ       ÿ                         ÿ                                 ÿ      ÿ
                                                    yp ´ eppqxp `          pq pl ´ q pl q       “                   yp   iPI   (4)
                                jPV,j‰i pPPji                       l“1                             jPV,j‰i pPPij

                                yp ´ eorgppq,cspp,1q xp “ q p1    pPP                                                          (5)

                                q p,l´1 ´ ecspp,l´1q,cspp,lq xp “ q pl       p P P, l P t2, ..., nppqu                         (6)



                                                                       7
                          nppq
                          ÿ
yp ´ eppqxp `                    pq pl ´ q pl q ě 0     i P I, p P Pi0                                                (7)
                          l“1

yp “ Qxp              i P V zt0u, p P P0i                                                                             (8)
yp ď Qxp p P P                                                                                                        (9)
       ÿ
q pl “      λplk qcspp,lq,k                       p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                          (10)
        kPBcspp,lq
              ÿ
apl “                     λplk acspp,lq,k           p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                        (11)
        kPBcspp,lq
   ÿ                                ÿ
              λplk “                          wplk            p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                              (12)
kPBcspp,lq                  kPBcspp,lq zt0u
       ÿ
                  wplk “ xp                p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                 (13)
kPBcspp,lq zt0u


λpl0 ď wpl1               p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                                  (14)
λplk ď wplk ` wpl,k`1                      p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu, k P Bcspp,lq zt0, bcspp,lq u                   (15)
λplbcspp,lq ď wplbcspp,lq    p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                               (16)
           ÿ
q pl “          λplk qcspp,lqk    p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                          (17)
        kPBcspp,lq
              ÿ
apl “                     λplk acspp,lqk         p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                           (18)
        kPBcspp,lq
   ÿ                                ÿ
              λplk “                          wplk            p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                              (19)
kPBcspp,lq                  kPBcspp,lq zt0u
       ÿ
                  wplk “ xp                p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                 (20)
kPBcspp,lq zt0u


λi0 ď wpl1             p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                                     (21)
λplk ď wplk ` wpl,k`1                      p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu, k P Bcspp,lq zt0, bcspp,lq u                   (22)
λplbcspp,lq ď wplbcspp,lq                p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                   (23)
∆pl “ apl ´ apl    p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                                         (24)
            ˜                 nppq
                                              ¸
 ÿ     ÿ                      ÿ                                                     ÿ        ÿ
              τp ` tppqxp `       p∆pl ` ∇pl q ` gi “                                             τp   iPI           (25)
jPV,j‰i pPPji                                  l“1                                jPV,j‰i pPPij

       nppq
       ÿ                   `                                   ˘
τp `         p∆pl ` ∇pl q ď Tmax ´ tppq ´ gdestppq ´ tdestppq,0 xp                           pPP                     (26)
       l“1

τp ` torgppq,cspp,1q xp ` ∇p1 “ sp1                     pPP                                                          (27)
sp,l´1 ` tcspp,l´1q,cspp,lq xp ` ∇pl “ spl                       p P P, l P t2, ..., nppqu                           (28)
spl “ spl ` ∆pl p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu                                                                            (29)
    ÿ                ÿ
           fo1 o “              xp j P F, o P Oj                                                                     (30)
o1 POj Yto`                     pPPorgpoq,destpoq
          j u
                                :cspp,lpoqq“jpoq
     ÿ                               ÿ
                fo1 o ´                       foo1 “ 0         j P F, o P Oj                                         (31)
o1 POj Yto`
          j u                o1 POj Yto´
                                       j u
    ÿ
               fo` ,o “ Cj             jPF                                                                           (32)
                  j
oPOj Yto´
        j u
    ÿ
               fo,o´ “ Cj              jPF                                                                           (33)
                      j
oPOj Yto`
        j u
        ÿ                                     ÿ
                      sp,lpoq ´                               sp,lpo1 q ě Tmax puo1 o ´ 1q       j P F, o, o1 P Oj   (34)
pPPorgpoq,destpoq                     pPPorgpo1 q,destpo1 q
:cspp,lpoqq“jpoq                      :cspp,lpo1 qq“jpo1 q
                                                                `          ˘ `          ˘
foo1 ď minpCpoq, Cpo1 qquoo1                   j P F, po, o1 q P Oj Y to`            ´
                                                                        j u ˆ Oj Y toj u                             (35)


                                                 8
                              xp P t0, 1u       pPP                                                                  (36)
                              τp ě 0, yp ě 0         pPP                                                             (37)
                              q pl , q pl , apl , apl , spl , spl , ∆pl , ∇pl ě 0   p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu        (38)

                              λplk ě 0, λplk ě 0          p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu, k P Bcspp,lq zt0u               (39)
                              wplk P t0, 1u, wplk P t0, 1u            p P P, l P t1, ..., nppqu, k P Bcspp,lq zt0u   (40)
                                                               1
                              uoo1 P t0, 1u     j P F, o, o P Oj                                                     (41)
                                                             `          ˘ `          ˘
                              foo1 ě 0      j P F, po, o1 q P Oj Y to`            ´
                                                                     j u ˆ Oj Y toj u .                              (42)

The objective function (1) minimizes the total driving, charging, and waiting time. Constraints (2) ensure that each
customer is visited exactly once. Constraints (3) impose flow conservation: at each vertex the number of incoming EVs
is equal to the number of outgoing EVs. Constraints (4) track the SoC of EVs at each customer location. Constraints (5)
track the SoC at the arrival at the first CS of each CS path. Constraints (6) couple the SoC of an EV that leaves a CS
with its SoC upon arrival to the next CS of the same path. Constraints (7) ensure that if the EV travels from a customer
to the depot, it has sufficient energy to reach its destination. Constraints (8) state that every EV leaves the depot with
a fully charged battery. Constraints (9) couple the SoC tracking variables with the path travel variables. Constraints
(10)–(24) model the relationship between the SoCs of an EV upon entering and leaving a CS and the charging time.
Constraints (25) track the departure time at each customer. Constraints (26) couple the time tracking variable with the
path travel variables, and impose the route duration limit. Constraints (27) and (28) define the starting and completion
times of every charging operation, as well as the potential waiting time before the start of the operation. Constraints
(29) define the completion time of the charging operations based on their starting time and duration. Constraints
(30) state that a charger has to be allocated to every charging operation of each selected CS path (at most one CS
path in the sum can be selected in a solution). Constraints (31) ensure flow conservation or the chargers of each CS.
Constraints (32) and (33) compute the flow value at the beginning and at the end of the time horizon, which is equal to
the number of available chargers at each CS. Constraints (34) couple the sequencing variables with the starting time of
the corresponding charging operations. Constraints (35) couple the flow variables with the operation sequence variables.
Specifically, a charger can be sent from a charging operation o1 to another charging operation o if o starts after the
completion of o1 . Finally, constraints (36)–(42) set the domains of the decision variables.
    Without preprocessing, the number of CS paths explodes with the number of CSs and the number of customers.
However, a large number of these arcs cannot be part of an optimal solution. Froger et al. (2019) presented a filtering
procedure to reduce the number of CS paths based on the definition of a dominance rule between two CS paths having
the same origin and destination. Due to the potential waiting times that can occur at CSs, we cannot apply the
dominance rule described in the work of Froger et al. (2019) between CS paths with the same origin and destination
if they both contain CSs. This is due to the fact that waiting times depend on all the CS paths selected to build a
complete solution. In our computational experiments, we apply the dominance rule between the unique CS path with
no CS between i and j (if it exists) and every other CS path of Pij , with i and j in V .



4     Solution method
In this section, we introduce a matheuristic to solve the E-VRP-NL-C. The method relies on an algorithmic framework
based on two interacting components: a route generator and a solution assembler. The first component builds a pool of
high-quality and diverse routes exploring the solution space of the problem without CS capacity constraints, while the
second component recombines routes from the pool trying to build a solution satisfying the CS capacity constraints.
    Algorithm 1 outlines the general structure of the method. The algorithms starts by generating an initial solution
without taking the CS capacity constraints into account (line 1). In our implementation, this step is carried out using
a modified version of the classical Clarke and Wright heuristic. Next, the algorithm enters the main loop (lines 3–
27). During nmax iterations the algorithm alternates between the route generation and solution assembly phases. In
particular, the algorithm uses procedure generateRoutes(¨) to retrieve a triplet pΦO , ΦR , ΩST q, where ΦO , ΦR are sets
of high-quality solutions for the original and relaxed problems (i.e., with and without CS capacity constraints), and ΩST


                                                                         9
is a set of independent, feasible, and high-quality routes. The latter will be referred to as the short-term pool, since it
is reset before each call to the route generator. Next (lines 4–12) the algorithm adds the routes making up the solutions
in ΦO and ΦR to a long-term pool ΩLT (never reset) while keeping track of the best solutions for both the original (s˚
                                                                                                                     O)

and the relaxed problem (s˚
                          R ). The intuition behind adding routes coming from potentially infeasible solutions to the

original problem (i.e., solutions to the relaxed problem) to the long-term pool is to foster diversity. Indeed, these routes
tend to be of high quality (in terms of the objective function) and might be recombined efficiently with others later.
    The algorithm then enters the assembly phase (line 13). In the first step of this phase, the algorithm merges the
short- and long-term pools ΩST and ΩLT . Thus, seeking to combine the past and recent history of the search into a
single set of routes that has a size that is manageable for the solution assembler. The assumption is that a new part of
the search space has been explored since the last call to the assembler. The algorithm then calls procedure assemble(¨)
to retrieve a tuple ps1 , S 1 q, where s1 is the best solution and S 1 is the set of all improving solutions (with respect to s˚
                                                                                                                               O)

for the original problem found during the call. If the assembler retrieves a solution, the algorithm adds its routes in S 1
to the long-term pool ΩLT and updates the incumbent s˚
                                                     O (lines 14–17).

    If after the call to the assembler, the algorithm still has not found a feasible solution (i.e., s˚
                                                                                                      O is still equal to

NULL), it implements two actions. First, it slightly modifies the search space to favor feasibility. In our implementation,
we modify the search space by artificially reducing the opening hours of the depot (line 20). The underlying idea is
that the reduction of the depot’s operating hours would lead to shorter routes with more slack to accommodate a late
departure from the depot or waiting times at charging stations during the assembly phase. Second, it tries to repair the
best-known solution for the relaxed problem (i.e., s˚
                                                    R ) by making it comply with the new solution space (line 21). In

our implementation, if a route visiting n customers has a duration strictly greater than the new value T of the depot
hours, the algorithm creates two new routes by adding a return to the depot after the tn{2uth customer and reoptimizes
the charging decisions within these routes. To avoid feasibility issues, the value of T is not considered when a route
visits only one customer. The same procedure is performed on the newly created routes as long as the routes contain
more than one customer and their duration exceeds T . On the other hand, if after the call to the assembler a feasible
solution is available (i.e., s˚
                              O is different than NULL), the algorithm then reestablishes (if needed) the original solution

space (i.e., resets the value of the depot opening hours to Tmax ) and moves to a new iteration.
    In our implementation of the framework, we develop an iterative local search algorithm as the route generator and
a branch-and-cut algorithm as the solution assembler. The remainder of this section describes these two components.


4.1     Route generator: an iterated local search algorithm for the E-VRP-NL
Our route generator is based on an ILS algorithm that solves the E-VRP-NL, while populating the pool of routes that
is used to assemble solutions to the E-VRP-NL-C. Introduced by Lourenço et al. (2003), ILS is a metaheuristic that
iteratively applies a local search phase to produce local optima, and perturbation mechanisms to escape from them. It
is initialized with a solution generally provided by a constructive heuristic. In our implementation, we combine ILS with
a variable neighborhood descent (VND) search strategy for the local search phase. Algorithm 2 outlines the general
                                                                                                   0
structure of our method. First, the current best solution s˚
                                                           R is set equal to the initial solution sR provided as input.

The algorithm then enters an iterative process. Except during the first iteration, it perturbs the current best solution
 R to escape from the current local optimum and potentially explore a new region of the search space (see §4.1.2). This
s˚
produces a new start point s1R for the VND which computes a new local optimum sR to the E-VRP-NL (see §4.1.1)
and also returns the best solution sO to the E-VRP-NL-C it has encountered. Note that we only check the CS capacity
constraints after accepting a move (i.e., when building a new solution to the E-VRP-NL). If appropriate, the algorithm
updates the best-known solutions s˚      ˚
                                  R and sO , as well as the sets ΦR and ΦO of improving solutions. It also populates a

pool of routes Ω. Note that we only add a route to Ω if it does not already contains a route visiting the same sequence of
vertices. This procedure is reiterated until the targeted number of iterations δ max has been reached. The optimization
returns the sets of improving solutions to the E-VRP-NL and E-VRP-NL-C and the generated pool of routes Ω. To
speed up the ILS algorithm, its implementation is based on the static move descriptor concept introduced by Zachariadis
and Kiranoudis (2010) which prevents unnecessary reevaluations of moves and provides an efficient way of exploring
neighborhoods (see Appendix B).


                                                               10
 Algorithm 1: Solution method - general structure
     /* f psq denotes the value of the objective function for a solution s and we assume that f pNULLq “ `8*/
 1   s0R ÐgenerateInitialSolution()
 2   n Ð 0, T Ð Tmax , ΩLT Ð H, s˚    0         0    ˚
                                 R Ð sR , sR Ð sR , sF O Ð NULL, sO Ð NULL
 3   while n ă nmax do
 4         pΦO , ΦR , ΩST q ÐgenerateRoutes(sR ,sO ,T )         (see Algorithm 2)
 5         for each s1R P ΦR do
 6               Add the routes of s1R to ΩLT
 7               if f ps1R q ă f ps˚         ˚    1
                                   R q then sR Ð sR
 8         end
 9         for each s1O P ΦO do
10               Add the routes of s1O to ΩLT
11               if f ps1O q ă f ps˚         ˚    1
                                   O q then sO Ð sO
12         end
13         ps1 , S 1 q Ð assemblepΩST Y ΩLT , s˚
                                               Oq     (see Algorithm 3) /* s1 “ NULL if no improving solution is found */
14         if s1 ‰ NULL then
15               s˚
                  O Ðs
                       1

16               if f ps1 q ă f ps˚         ˚
                                  R q then sR Ð s
                                                  1

17               for each s P S 1 do Add the routes of s to ΩLT
18         end
19         if s˚
               O “ NULL then
20               T Ð maxtTmin , α ¨ T u /* Tmin : minimum possible value for T , α ă 1 a tuning parameter */
21               sR Ð repair(s˚
                              R ), sO Ð NULL
22         else
23               if T ă Tmax then T Ð Tmax
                                 ˚
24               sO Ð s˚
                       O , sR Ð sR
25         end
26         nÐn`1
27   end

28   return s˚
             O




 Algorithm 2: The route generating procedure
     Input : a solution s0R to the E-VRP-NL, a solution s0O to the E-VRP-NL-C (possibly equal to NULL), a maximum route
                  duration limit T
     Output: a set ΦR and a set ΦO of improving solutions to the E-VRP-NL and to the E-VRP-NL-C, a pool of routes Ω
     Procedure generateRoutes(s0R ,s0O ,T ):
           /* We denote f psq the value of the objective function for a solution s and we assume f pNULLq “ `8*/
           δ Ð 0, ΦR Ð H, ΦO Ð H, Ω Ð H
           s˚    0    ˚    0
            R Ð sR , sO Ð sO
           while δ ă δ max do
              if δ “ 0 then s1R Ð s0R
                 else s1R Ðperturb(s˚
                                    R ,T )       (see §4.1.2)
                 psR , sO q Ð VND(s1R ,T )   (see Algorithm 5 in Appendix C)
                 Add the routes of sR to Ω
                 if f psR q ă f ps˚                          ˚
                                  R q then ΦR Ð ΦR Y tsR u, sR Ð sR
                 if f psO q ă f ps˚                          ˚
                                  O q then ΦO Ð ΦO Y tsO u, sO Ð sO
                 δ Ðδ`1
           end
           return pΦR , ΦO , Ωq



4.1.1       The VND search phase

The VND relies on an ordered list of local search operators. A single operator is considered at a time. If an improving
move is found, the search restarts with the first operator of the list. Otherwise, it moves to the next operator. The


                                                                       11
search reaches a local optimum when the last operator fails to improve the current solution.
   Our VND employs several classical VRP operators focusing on sequencing decisions. These operators are defined
for solutions represented as sequences of customer visits without CSs. We use five vertex exchanges operators that work
by relocating or exchanging customer visits : 1-0, 2-0, 1-1, 2-1, and 2-2 vertex exchanges. We also use the inter-route
and intra-route versions of 2-opt. We also define a specific operator for the E-VRP-NL, referred to as separate. This
operator creates two routes from a single route by inserting a return to the depot after a customer visit. It may improve
the cost of a solution if at least one CS is part of the split route. Indeed, creating two routes rather than one may
decrease the total time when an expensive detour to a CS is avoided. We stop applying an operator as soon as it has
found an improving move. We refer to Algorithm 5 in Appendix C for a description of the general scheme of the VND
search phase.
   We only consider CSs when evaluating local search moves. In order to make charging decisions in such a way that
every route involved in a move has the lowest possible duration, we solve one (inter-route moves) or more (intra-route
moves) fixed route vehicle charging problems (FRVCPs). In a nutshell, this problem consists in inserting CSs into a
fixed route (i.e., sequence of customers) trying to gain (energy) feasibility while minimizing the total duration of the
route. To this end, we use the labeling algorithm described by Froger et al. (2019) that applies shortest path techniques
similar to the one presented in Baum et al. (2019). After each call, the duration of the route is stored in a cache memory
to avoid recomputing it. It is worth noting that this procedure yields a “true” evaluation of the move. Indeed, all local
search-based metaheuristics for E-VRPs reported in the literature use only approximate evaluations of the moves. The
reason is that, in a quest for computational efficiency, these approaches embed local search operators that either do not
revise the charging decisions (where, when, and how much to charge) or solve the resulting FRVCP heuristically. Note
that this is a fundamental difference between our ILS and the one described in Montoya et al. (2017) (aside from using
different local search and perturbation operators).
   Since only improving solutions are accepted in the VND framework, we only solve FRVCPs for potentially improving
moves. Therefore, we rely on a procedure that filters out unpromising or infeasible moves as done for example in Schiffer
et al. (2018a) and Hiermann et al. (2019). Such moves are determined by establishing a lower bound on the duration
of the routes resulting from a move. The value of this lower bound is computed as the sum of two terms: the minimum
increase in time to detour to a CS between two successive vertices in the route, and a lower bound on the charging
time. The latter is computed by dividing the sum of the energy consumption of the route and the minimum increase in
energy consumption to detour to a CS between two successive vertices in the route, by the steepest slope for a segment
of the piecewise linear charging functions. Similar ideas are used in shortest path algorithms for electric vehicles within
the computation of a lower bound on the trip time from any vertex to the target vertex (see Baum et al. (2019)). We
note that this lower bound corresponds to the true duration of a route in the case where its energy consumption does
not exceed Q. If the lower bound on the route duration exceeds the limit, then the route is infeasible. Otherwise,
the procedure checks whether the route duration is stored in the cache memory and modifies the lower bound value
accordingly. We use the lower bound on the duration of the routes to determine whether the move is strictly non-
improving. We refer to Algorithm 6 in Appendix C for a detailed explanation on this procedure. If a move is not
discarded by the lower bound on the basis that it is infeasible or non-improving, we solve FRVCPs for all the routes
that have not been evaluated exactly, as long as the move remains feasible and potentially improving.


4.1.2    The perturbation phase

Whenever we reach a local optimum, we perturb the current solution by removing geographically close customers and
by reinserting them at different positions. First, we randomly select a customer i P I. We then remove the κ closest cus-
                                                                                                                      a
tomers to i from their respective routes, with κ randomly selected in the interval rmint|I|, 5u, maxtmint|I|, 5u, r |I|sus.
                                                                        `                                      ˘
We set the distance between two customers i1 and i2 as equal to 0.5 ti1 ,i2 ` ti2 ,i1 ` pei1 ,i2 ` ei2 ,i1 q{ρ˚ . The value of
ρ˚ corresponds to the steepest slope for a segment of the piecewise linear charging functions. Finally, customers are
reinserted in the solution one at a time and in a random order by applying the following rules. A removed customer
cannot be reinserted in the same route from which it was removed. We evaluate the increase in time of every feasible
insertion of the customer. This is done by reoptimizing the charging decisions. The probability of selecting a given fea-



                                                             12
sible insertion is set inversely proportional to the time increase due to the insertion. If there exists no feasible insertion,
we simply create a new route with the customer.


4.2     Solution assembler: a branch-and-cut method
The objective of the second component of the matheuristic is to assemble the best possible solution to the E-VRP-NL-C
from the pool of routes Ω, obtained from the route generator component. We recall that the charging decisions made
for a route are such that its total duration is minimized. The main challenge of this second component is to combine
the routes in a solution that satisfies the CS capacity constraints.
   Determining the best solution that can be built from selected routes in a pool is a strategy that has been successfully
applied to several hardcore VRPs. Usually, this reduces to solving a set partitioning model (Alvarenga et al., 2007;
Subramanian et al., 2013; Villegas et al., 2013; Montoya et al., 2017; Andelmin and Bartolini, 2019). The strategy
is used either as a post-optimization phase or as an intensification phase within a methaheuritic. An example of the
latter is the matheuristic proposed by Subramanian et al. (2013) to solve a class of VRPs. This approach has been
mostly applied to problems without route coupling constraints (i.e., the feasibility of one route is independent of the
feasibility of other routes). Due to the CS capacity constraints, the route coupling constraints need to be accounted for
in the E-VRP-NL-C. To the best of our knowledge, only two studies have dealt with route coupling constraints in the
assembly phase of a solution from a pool of routes: Morais et al. (2014) and Grangier et al. (2017), both in the context
of cross-dock VRPs.
   In this work, we propose assembling the solutions using a decomposition of the problem into a route selection master
problem and a CS capacity management subproblem. The master problem consists in selecting a set of routes such that
every customer is covered by exactly one route. The charging decisions within the selected routes (as imported from the
first component) may lead to a violation of the CS capacity constraints. In such cases, the subproblem checks whether
the CS capacity constraints can be met by revising some of the decisions in these routes.
   We propose four versions of the subproblem, which primarily depend on the degree of allowed modifications on the
routes selected by the master problem. In the first version (denoted by N – No possible revision), we do not revise
the charging decisions in the selected routes and we only check whether the CS capacity constraints are satisfied. In
the second version (denoted by D – Delay), we allow delaying the starting time of each route (i.e., we postpone the
departure of the EV from the depot) to satisfy the CS capacity constraints. We note that in versions N and D no
increase in the total time of the solution is incurred. In the third version (denoted by DW – Delay+Waiting times), we
allow delaying the starting time of each route, and we also allow vehicles to wait for a charger if a CS is overcrowded
by EVs. In DW, waiting times can only occur when a route stops several times for charging, since, when there is only
one stop at a CS, delaying the starting time of the route is preferable, as this does not penalize the objective function.
In the fourth version (denoted by DWR – Delay+Waiting times+Revision of charging amounts), we also revise the
amount of energy charged at the CSs. If a route contains at least two stops at CSs, we may decide to charge more
during the first stop in order to avoid waiting at the second stop before charging the EV. We note that this strategy
may sometimes avoid detouring to one of the CSs visited in the original route.
   We designed a branch-and-cut algorithm to efficiently solve the assembling problem while exploiting the decompo-
sition discussed above. While solving the route selection problem, we dynamically solve the CS capacity management
subproblem. More specifically, at each node of the branch-and-bound tree, we solve the subproblem for the current
selection of routes. Depending on the version of the subproblem, we generate different cuts to discard infeasible route
selections (see §4.2.3). For versions DW and DWR, we also add cuts to account for the underestimation of the increase
in the total time to visit the customers.
   We outline the general structure of the branch-and-cut method in Algorithm 3 (we focus on its most common used
implementation based on interacting with the branch-and-bound procedure embedded into the MILP solver via callback
routines). When provided as an input, we give to the solver the objective function value of a solution to the E-VRP-NL-
C as a cutoff value (i.e., an upper bound on the value of the objective function of the master problem). Therefore, the
solver only considers the solutions with an objective function value strictly less than this cutoff value. The solver returns
the best solution assembled from a given pool of routes by the branch-and-cut algorithm. The component also returns


                                                              13
a set Φ of improving solutions (compared to the initial solution s) computed throughout the algorithm. Whenever a
selection of routes x̄ at an integer node of the branch-and-bound tree does not lead to the introduction of a cut after
solving the capacity management subproblem CM P. px̄q, we save it along with the updated charging decisions (delays,
waiting times, revision of charging amounts) to build a complete solution.


 Algorithm 3: The assembling procedure (focus on the implementation)
   Input : a pool Ω of routes / a solution s (possibly equal to NULL) to the E-VRP-NL-C
   Output: the best solution s˚ computed by the branch-and-cut algorithm / a set Φ of improving solutions to the
             E-VRP-NL-C (in comparison with s)
   Procedure assemble(Ω,s):
      ‚ Build the MILP formulation rHC1s or rHC2s of the route selection problem from pool Ω (see §4.2.1 and §4.2.2)
        ‚ Define the callback function (function called at every node of the branch-and-bound tree) as procedure
         SolveSubProblem(x̄) (see Algorithm 4) and associate to it a CPU time limit of τ SP per call
        ‚ Give the model rHC.s, the callback function, the cutoff value f psq (objective function value of s) to the MILP
         solver and launch it with a CPU time limit equal to τ
        ‚ Retrieve the best solution s˚ computed within the CPU time limit and the set Φ of improving solutions (compared
         to s)
        return ps˚ , Φq




   In the following subsections, we provide a detailed description of our four versions of the CS capacity management
subproblem. We use the following notation. The binary parameter apr, iq is equal to one if and only if route r P Ω
serves customer i P I. We define parameter tprq as the duration of a route r P Ω, obtained from the route generation
component. We denote by OpΩq the set containing all the charging operations occurring in the routes belonging to Ω,
and by Oj pΩq Ď OpΩq all the charging operations occurring at CS j P F in these routes. We denote by Optruq the
list of charging operations occurring in route r. Let rpoq and jpoq be the route and the CS associated with a charging
operation o. Let Spoq and dpoq be the starting time and duration of charging operation o in the route rpoq P Ω. For each
route r P Ω, we assume that the operations in Optruq are sorted in non-decreasing order of their starting times. We
denote by sucpoq the charging operation following o in route rpoq. If there does not exist any charging operation after
o, we set sucpoq “ ´1. For every route r P Ω and for each charging operation o P Optruq we denote by t` poq the total
time (driving and customer serving) spent in r by the EV between its departure from jpoq and its arrival at jpsucpoqq
or at the depot if sucpoq “ ´1. For each operation o, we also introduce two parameters ESpoq and LSpoq representing
its earliest and latest possible starting times. The values of these parameters depend on the different versions of the
subproblem and they are specified in the following subsections.


4.2.1    N and D subproblem versions

To model the route selection problem, we introduce a binary variable xr equal to 1 if and only if route r P Ω is selected.
A MILP formulation of this problem is then the following classical set partitioning model:
                                                              ÿ
                                          rHC1s minimize            tprqxr                                                  (43)
                                                              rPΩ
                                                              ÿ
                                                 subject to         apr, iqxr “ 1     iPI                                   (44)
                                                              rPΩ

                                                              xr P t0, 1u    r P Ω.                                         (45)

The objective (43) is to select a subset of routes from Ω that minimizes the total duration. Constraints (44) ensure
that each customer is visited exactly once. Constraints (45) set the domains of the decision variables.

   Let Ω1` px̄q denote the set of routes with at least one charging operation resulting from a feasible solution x̄ to the
above problem, i.e., Ω1` px̄q “ tr P Ω : x̄r “ 1 ^ Optruq ‰ Hu. Note that the routes without mid-route charging do
not need to be considered when verifying the CS capacity constraints. We also define Ω1` px̄, jq Ď Ω1` px̄q as the set of
routes with a charging operation at j P F .



                                                               14
Version N In this version of the subproblem, the CS capacity management subproblem does not revise the charging
operations scheduled in the selected routes. It only checks the feasibility of the charging operations with respect to the
capacity constraints. We therefore set ESpoq “ LSpoq “ Spoq. Let CMP1 px̄q be this subproblem defined for the routes
that belong to Ω1` px̄q. It can be decomposed into |F | independent problems, one for every CS. To solve CMP1 px̄q,
for every CS j P F we apply a polynomial algorithm to check the existence of subsets of operations overloading the
CS. Specifically, we call procedure CheckCapacityCut(Oj pΩ1` px̄qq, Cj ) to check whether the capacity constraints are
satisfied according to the scheduled charging operations in Oj pΩ1` px̄qq. We refer the reader to Algorithm 7 in Appendix
D for the details of this procedure.


Version D The main drawback of version N is that it may discard promising routes. Indeed, in some cases simply
delaying the starting time of some of the routes may allow their combination into a feasible solution to the problem. Note
that shifting the start time of a route does not increase the objective function. In version D, we seek to resolve capacity
violations by shifting starting times of the routes. Let CMP2 px̄q be this subproblem. In contrast to CMP1 px̄q, CMP2 px̄q
does not decompose into an independent problem for each CS. Let o be a charging operation. Its earliest starting time
ESpoq is equal to Spoq since by construction the operations are left shifted in each route of the pool. The parameter LSpoq is
computed by subtracting from Tmax the time needed to complete the route (considering the duration of the next charging
operations, the driving times, and no waiting times). Specifically, LSpoq “ Tmax ´ o1 POptrpoquq:Spo1 qěSpoq pt` po1 q ` dpo1 qq.
                                                                                  ř

    We now define a continuous-time MILP formulation of CMP2 px̄q. Let the variable So define the starting time of
operation o P OpΩ1` px̄qq. We model the capacity constraints using the flow-based formulation used in Section 3. For
                                                         ´
each CS j P F , we consider two dummy operations o`
                                                  j and oj , and we define Cpoq :“ 1 for all o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq and

Cpo`         ´
   j q :“ Cpoj q :“ Cj . We then introduce the continuous variable foo1 representing the quantity of resource (i.e.,

chargers) that is transferred from charging operation o to charging operation o1 . We also define the sequential binary
variable uoo1 taking the value of 1 if operation o is processed before operation o1 . The MILP formulation of CMP2 px̄q
is as follows:

            rCMP2 px̄qs minimize 0                                                                                                          (46)
                                                                             1                            1
                       subject to uoo1 ` uo1 o ď 1          j P F, o, o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq : o ă o                                             (47)
                                    uoo2 ě uoo1 ` uo1 o2 ´ 1               j P F, o, o1 , o2 P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq                                (48)
                                                                                        1                               1
                                    So1 ě So ` dpoquoo1 ` pLSpoq ´ ESpo qqpuoo1 ´ 1q                          j P F, o, o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq   (49)
                                                                       `
                                    Ssucpoq “ So ` dpoq ` t poq o P OpΩ1` px̄qq : sucpoq ‰ ´1                                               (50)
                                             ÿ
                                                       fo1 o “ 1 j P F, o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq                                                   (51)
                                    o1 POj pΩ1` px̄qqYto`
                                                        j u
                                               ÿ                                    ÿ
                                                              fo1 o ´                                foo1 “ 0    j P F, o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq   (52)
                                    o1 POj pΩ1` px̄qqYto`
                                                        j u                o1 POj pΩ1` px̄qqYto´
                                                                                               j u
                                             ÿ
                                                            fo` ,o “ Cj           jPF                                                       (53)
                                                               j
                                    oPOj pΩ1` px̄qqYto´
                                                      j u
                                             ÿ
                                                            fo,o´ “ Cj            jPF                                                       (54)
                                                                   j
                                    oPOj pΩ1` px̄qqYto`
                                                      j u
                                              `            ˘
                                    foo1 ď max Cpoq, Cpo1 q uoo1                 j P F, o, o1 P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq                               (55)
                                    ESpoq ď So ď LSpoq             o P OpΩ1` px̄qq                                                          (56)
                                    foo1 ě 0       j P F,
                                               `                   ˘ `                      ˘
                                    po, o q P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq Y to`
                                        1                                               ´
                                                                j u Y Oj pΩ1` px̄qq Y toj u                                                 (57)
                                    uoo1 P t0, 1u      j P F, o, o1 P Oj pΩ1` px̄qq.                                                        (58)

CMP2 px̄q is a feasibility problem. Constraints (47) state that for two distinct operations o and o1 , either o precedes o1 ,
o1 precedes o, or o and o1 are processed in parallel (if there is more than one charger at the CS). Constraints (48) express
the transitivity of the precedence relations. Constraints (49) are the disjunctive constraints on the operations related


                                                                           15
to the same CS. Each such constraint is active when uoo1 “ 1 and, in which case, it enforces the precedence relation
between charging operations o and o1 . Note that no waiting times can occur before a charging operation. Constraints
(50) enforce the precedence relation and the time lag between the charging operations occurring in the same route.
Constraints (51) state that a charger has to be allocated to each charging operation. Constraints (52) ensure flow
conservation. Constraints (53) and (54) define the value of the flow leaving the source and the flow entering the sink.
Constraints (55) couple the flow variables with the sequence variables. Constraints (56) and (58) define the domains of
the decision variables.


4.2.2     DW and DWR subproblem versions

In these versions of the subproblem, we allow a possible increase in the total duration of the routes. Indeed, introducing
waiting times at CSs or revising the amount of charged energy may help resolve capacity violations, but such modifica-
tions may extend routes due to the non-linearity of the charging functions and the consideration of multiple charging
technologies. Let θ be a non-negative variable estimating the added delay when solving the CS capacity management
subproblem. A MILP formulation of the route selection problem (derived directly from rHC1s) follows:
                                                                      ÿ
                                              rHC2s minimize               tprqxr ` θ                                     (59)
                                                                     rPΩ

                                                        subject to (44), (45)
                                                                     θ ě 0.                                               (60)

Thereafter, we assume that we have a fixed selection Ω1` px̄q of routes given by fixing the variables txr urPΩ to values
respecting the current constraints of the route selection problem.


Version DW In this version of the subproblem, we assume that EVs can wait at CSs if delaying the starting times
of the routes is not sufficient to avoid capacity violations. Let CMP3 px̄q be the scheduling subproblem of the routes
Ω1` px̄q, which has the objective of minimising the addition of waiting times. The MILP formulation of CMP3 px̄q uses
the decision variables So , foo1 , uoo1 defined in CMP2 px̄q. We also introduce variable ∇o that represents the waiting time
incurred before the start of charging operation o P OpΩ1` px̄qq. For every charging operation o, its earliest starting time
ESpoq is equal to Spoq and its latest starting time LSpoq is equal to Tmax ´ o1 POptrpoquq:Spo1 qěSpoq pt` po1 q ` dpo1 qq. The
                                                                              ř

MILP formulation of CMP3 px̄q is as follows:
                                            ÿ
                rCMP3 px̄qs minimize                   ∇o                                                                 (61)
                                       oPOpΩ1` px̄qq


                          subject to (47) ´ (49), (51) ´ (58)
                                       Ssucpoq “ So ` dpoq ` t` poq ` ∇sucpoq       o P OpΩ1` px̄qq : sucpoq ‰ ´1         (62)
                                       ∇o ě 0,     o P OpΩ1` px̄qq.                                                       (63)

The objective (61) is to minimize the waiting time inserted in each route. Constraints (62) define the minimum time
lag between the charging operations occurring in the same route. Constraints (63) define the domains of the waiting
decision variables.

   Version DWR In this version of the subproblem, in addition to the introduction of waiting times, resolving capacity
violations at CSs can also be achieved by revising the amounts of energy charged at each CS in every route. We denote
by CMP4 px̄q the subproblem in which we want to minimize the increase in the duration of the selected routes. Indeed,
revising the charging operations leads to an increase in time when the CSs in a route have different charging technologies
or when the charging functions are non-linear. Note that if we substantially increase the charging amounts at a CS we
may not need to stop at the subsequent CS in the route. We therefore need to account for the potential removal of stops
at CSs.
   We denote by e` poq the energy consumption of the EV between its departure from jpoq and its arrival at jpsucpoqq
if sucpoq ‰ ´1. This takes into account the energy consumed to visit all the customers scheduled in the route between


                                                                16
charging operations o and sucpoq or the depot. Since a charging operation can be skipped by charging more energy
during the previous or next charging operations of the same route, we define t        epoq as the driving time and
                                                                             rpoq and r
energy saved if the EV does not detour to perform the charging operation o. We define Ω2` px̄q as the subset of Ω1` px̄q
that contains only the routes including at least two charging operations (i.e., Ω2` px̄q “ tr P Ω1` px̄q : |Optruq| ě 2u).
   Our formulation of CMP4 px̄q draws upon formulation rCMP3 px̄qs. Aside from using decision variables defined in
the latter, rCMP4 px̄qs also uses the following decision variables for the operations in OpΩ2` px̄qq. The variables to and
to are the scaled arrival and departure times, according to the charging function of CS jpoq. The binary variables
wok and wok are equal to 1 if and only if the SoC lies between qjpoq,k´1 and qjpoq,k , with k P Bjpoq zt0u, upon starting
and finishing operation o, respectively. The continuous variables λok and λok are the coefficients associated with the
breakpoints pajpoq,k , qjpoq,k q of φjpoq upon starting and finishing operation o, respectively. The continuous variables y o
and y o represent the SoC of the EV upon starting and finishing charging operation o. The continuous variable ∆o
represents the duration of charging operation o.
   For each route, we check whether it might be possible for a charging operation o to be skipped by considering that
the EV leaves the previous CS (or depot) with a fully replenished battery. If this allows the EV to reach the next CS
or to return to the depot without performing o, then we allow the EV not to detour to the corresponding CS. To this
end, we introduce the binary variable zo equal to 1 if and only if the charging operation o is executed.
   We also compute for every charging operation the time windows during which it must be scheduled. The earliest
starting time ESpoq of a charging operation o is computed assuming that the EV skips (if the previous computation has
shown it is possible) the previous charging operations (if any), and charges the maximum between the energy needed to
recover the detour to the CS and the energy required to reach the next CS. To compute the latter, we consider that the
SoC of the EV upon arriving at the CS is maximal (i.e., a full charge occurs at the previous CS). Then, we estimate the
charging times assuming that the EV arrives with an empty battery. The latest starting time LSpoq of operation o is
computed assuming that the EV returns to the depot at time Tmax and assuming that the EV skips the next charging
operations (if possible).
   The MILP formulation of CMP4 px̄q is as follows:
                                   ÿ                       ÿ        `                               ˘
      rCMP4 px̄qs minimize                   ∇o `                       ∆o ´ dpoq ´ p1 ´ zo qt
                                                                                             rpoq                       (64)
                             oPOpΩ1` px̄qq          oPOpΩ2` px̄qq


                subject to (47) ´ (48), (52) ´ (58), (63)
                                  ÿ
                           yo “         λok qjpoqk o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                      (65)
                                   kPBjpoq
                                       ÿ
                            to “             λok ajpoqk     o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                             (66)
                                   kPBjpoq
                               ÿ                    ÿ
                                       λok “                  wok   o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                     (67)
                             kPBjpoq           kPBjpoq zt0u
                                 ÿ
                                            wok “ zo      o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                               (68)
                             kPBjpoq zt0u


                            λo0 ď wo1        o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                            (69)
                            λok ď wok ` wo,k`1             o P OpΩ2` px̄qq, k P Bjpoq zt0, bjpoq u                      (70)
                            λobjpoq ď wobjpoq o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                           (71)
                                    ÿ
                            yo “        λo qjpoqk o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                       (72)
                                   kPBjpoq
                                       ÿ
                            to “             λo ajpoqk     o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                              (73)
                                   kPBjpoq
                               ÿ                    ÿ
                                       λok “                  wok   o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                     (74)
                             kPBjpoq           kPBjpoq zt0u
                                 ÿ
                                            wok “ 1       o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                               (75)
                             kPBjpoq zt0u


                            λo0 ď wo1        o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                            (76)


                                                                         17
                            λok ď wok ` wo,k`1                o P OpΩ2` px̄qq, k P Bjpoq zt0, bjpoq u                                    (77)
                            λobjpoq ď wobjpoq           o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                                  (78)
                            ∆o “ to ´ to             o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                                     (79)
                            ∆o ď ajpoq,bjpoq zo             o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                                              (80)
                            yo               “ qfirst prq     r P Ω2` px̄q                                                               (81)
                                 first prq

                            y sucpoq “ y o ´ e` poq ` e
                                                      rpoqp1 ´ zo q                  o P OpΩ2` px̄qq : sucpoq ‰ ´1                       (82)

                            y o ´ e` poq ` r
                                           epoqp1 ´ zo q ě 0                o P OpΩ2` px̄qq : sucpoq “ ´1                                (83)
                                                                                 1                           1
                            So1 ě So ` dpoquoo1 ` pLSpoq ´ ESpo qqpuoo1 ´ 1q                      j P F, o, o P Oj pΩ1` px̄qzΩ2` px̄qq   (84)
                                                                        1                              1
                            So1 ě So ` ∆o ` pLSpoq ´ ESpo qqpuoo1 ´ 1q                       j P F, o, o P Oj pΩ2` px̄qq                 (85)
                                                               `
                            Ssucpoq “ So ` dpoq ` t poq ` ∇sucpoq                      o P OpΩ1` px̄qzΩ2` px̄qq : sucpoq ‰ ´1            (86)
                            Ssucpoq “ So ` ∆o ` t` poq ´ t
                                                         rpoqp1 ´ zo q ` ∇sucpoq                     o P OpΩ2` px̄qq : sucpoq ‰ ´1       (87)
                                                 `
                            So ` ∆o ` t poq ´ t
                                              rpoqp1 ´ zo q ď Tmax o P OpΩ2` px̄qq : sucpoq “ ´1                                         (88)
                                     ÿ
                                                fo1 o “ 1 o P OpΩ1` px̄qzΩ2` px̄qq                                                       (89)
                            o1 POjpoq pΩ1` px̄qqYto`
                                                   jpoq
                                                        u
                                              ÿ
                                                              fo1 o “ zo     o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                                             (90)
                            o1 POjpoq pΩ1` px̄qqYto`
                                                   jpoq
                                                        u


                            zo P t0, 1u, ∆o ě 0, 0 ď y o ď Q, 0 ď y o ď Q                    o P OpΩ2` px̄qq                             (91)
                            wok , wok P t0, 1u,             o P OpΩ2` px̄qq, k P Bjpoq zt0u                                              (92)
                            λok , λok P t0, 1u          o P OpΩ2` px̄qq, k P Bjpoq .                                                     (93)

The objective (64) is to minimize the total additional time inserted in each route. Constraints (65)–(79) model the
piecewise linear charging functions. Constraints (80) impose a duration equal to 0 for each charging operation that is
not executed anymore. For each route r P Ω2` px̄q, constraints (81) define the SoC qfirst prq of the EV upon starting
its first charging operation (denoted ofirst prq). Constraints (82) couple the SoC of the EV after finishing a charging
operation with its SoC when starting the next charging operation occurring in the route. Note that if zo is equal to
0, then the SoC y o “ y o still takes into account the energy consumed to detour to CS jpoq. The energy saved by not
stopping at this CS is subtracted when computing the SoC at the beginning of the next operation of the route or at
the arrival at the depot (see (83)). For each route, constraints (83) force the corresponding EV to have enough SoC
at the end of the last charging operation to reach the depot. Constraints (84) and (85) are the disjunctive constraints
on the operations related to the same CS. Constraints (86) and (87) define a minimum time lag between the charging
operations occurring in the same route. Note that if zo is equal to 0, then the starting time So still takes into account
the detour to CS jpoq. The time saved by not stopping at this CS is subtracted during the computation of the departure
time for the next operation of the route. Constraints (88) limit the route duration. Constraints (89) and (90) assign a
charger to each operation that is executed. Constraints (91)–(93) define the domains of the new decision variables.


4.2.3   Cut generation procedure

To couple the route selection problem with the CS capacity management subproblem, we generate constraints to cut
off infeasible selections of routes in Ω1` px̄q and to bound the variable θ (for versions DW and DWR). The efficiency
of our branch-and-cut method is based on the strength of these cuts. Rather than only cutting the current solution,
we investigate a strategy that generates cuts for a large portion of the solution space of the route selection problem.
Moreover, we try to add several cuts at a time to speed up the convergence of the algorithm.
   We first focus on the cuts that are applicable only to version N. Given a CS j, let Oj be a set containing subsets
of operations with a cardinality strictly larger than Cj , which overlap in time. To discard the current solution x̄ in the




                                                                            18
route selection problem, we add to rHC1s the following cuts:
                                                 ÿ
                                                                 xr ď C j   j P F, U P Oj .                             (94)
                                        rPΩ1` px̄q:OptruqXU ‰H



   For the other versions of the subproblem, Algorithm 4 summarizes the procedure used to solve the capacity man-
agement subproblem and to generate cuts to discard infeasible selection of routes. We first try to detect, before solving
CMP. px̄q, the potential infeasibility of the subproblem using two fast procedures focusing independently on each CS. If
the subproblem is deemed infeasible, then we generate cuts specially crafted for our problem. If not, we solve the MILP
formulation rCMP. px̄qs with a commercial solver. If possible, we decompose the subproblem into smaller independent
problems beforehand. We present below the details of the cut generation procedure.

   The two algorithms we apply to detect capacity violations that cannot be solved by the CS capacity management
subproblem are frequently used in scheduling problems. They focus on a single CS and are based on a reasoning rooted
in the time windows (derived from the opening hours of the depot) in which every charging operation can be scheduled.
The first algorithm focuses on the fixed part of the charging operations (line 3). We call a fixed part of a charging
operation o the time interval (if it exists) between the latest starting time LSpoq and earliest completion time ESpoq`dpoq.
Based on the fixed part of the charging operations, we detect subsets of operations that will necessarily lead to a violation
of the capacity constraints and we add cuts to forbid the underlying subset of routes (line 6). Hereafter, we refer to
this algorithm as the fixed part-based algorithm. The details of this procedure are provided in Algorithm 8 (Appendix
D). The second algorithm is based on an energy reasoning (line 8). The required energy consumption of a charging
operation o during a time interval rt1 , t2 q is equal to the minimum duration (possibly equal to 0) for which o is surely
executed within the interval. For a CS j, the total required energy consumption by the charging operation o scheduled
at j over time interval rt1 , t2 q cannot exceed Cj pt2 ´ t1 q. The difference between the last term and the total required
energy consumption is called the slack over rt1 , t2 q. The slack over any time interval must always be non-negative. The
number of intervals that needs consideration is bounded (see Baptiste et al. (2001) for more details). When there exists
an interval for which a slack is strictly negative, the subset of operations having a non-zero energy consumption on
this interval cannot be performed without leading to a violation of the capacity constraints. We add a no-good cut to
discard it (line 10). Hereafter, we refer to this algorithm as the energy reasoning-based algorithm. The details of this
procedure are provided in Algorithm 9 (Appendix D). To limit the computation time, if the two previous algorithms
prove the infeasibility of the subproblem, we add to the route selection problem the generated cuts and we do not solve
the subproblem.
   The decomposition of the subproblem CMP2 px̄q, CMP3 px̄q, or CMP4 px̄q into several independents smaller subprob-
lems is based on reasoning about the stops at the CSs in the different routes. The interest is to potentially formulate
cuts for each of these small subproblems. Let Gpx̄q be a graph in which each vertex represents a CS and there exists an
edge between two CSs if there exists a route in Ω1` px̄q with charging operations at these two CSs. We can decompose
the subproblem into as many independent subproblems as the number of connected components of Gpx̄q. Let CpGpx̄qq
be the connected components of Gpx̄q. For every connected component C P CpGpx̄qq, only the charging operations
scheduled at the CSs in C need consideration. We denote by CMPpx̄, Cq the subproblem restricted to these operations.
When CMPpx̄, Cq is infeasible, we generate an integer Benders cut, also called combinatorial Benders cut (Codato and
Fischetti, 2006), to invalidate the current solution to the route selection problem (line 18). For versions DW and DWR
of the subproblem, we also compare the current value θ̄ of θ with the increase in time computed over the set C feas of
connected components for which the corresponding subproblem is feasible. For each subset C of C feas , we generate an
integer Benders optimality cut if the route selection problem underestimates the increase in time needed to resolve the
capacity violations at CSs (line 26).




                                                                 19
 Algorithm 4: Solving the CS capacity management subproblem and generating cuts for version D,
 DW, or DWR
     Input: a solution x̄ to the current master problem
1    Procedure SolveSubProblem(x̄):
2        Compute ESpoq and LSpoq for each charging operation o P OpΩ1` px̄qq
3        for j P F do
 4             O ÐFixedPartAlgorithm(Oj px̄q, Cj )        (see Algorithm 8)
 5             if O ‰ H then
                                                                                                ř
 6                   for U P O do Generate the following cut and add it to rHC.s:                                xr ď C j
                                                                                      rPΩ1` px̄,jq:OptruqXU ‰H

 7             else
 8                   O ÐEnergyAlgorithm(Oj px̄q, Cj )      (see Algorithm 9)
 9                   if O ‰ H then
                                                                                                         ř
10                         for U P O do Generate the following cut and add it to rHC.s: 1 `                              pxr ´ 1q ď 0
                                                                                              rPΩ1` px̄,jq:OptruqXU ‰H

11                   end
12             end
13       end
14       if no cuts have been generated and x̄ is integer then
15             C feas Ð H
16             for each C P CpGpx̄qq do
17                   Solve the MILP formulation of CMPpx̄, Cq that corresponds to the selected version of the subproblem
18                   if no solution is found then
19                         Generate the following cut and add it to rHC.s:
                                     ř
20                         1` `              ˘pxr ´ 1q ď 0
                                  Ť
                              rP         Ω1` px̄,jq
                                   jPC

21                   else
22                         C feas Ð C feas Y tCu /* Only for versions DW and DWR
23                   end
24             end
               /* Only for versions DW and DWR
25             for every subset C of connected components of C feas do
                     /* Let z pCMPpx̄, Cqq denote the optimal value of subproblem CMPpx̄, Cq
                        ř
26                   if    z pCMPpx̄, Cqq ą θ̄ then
                       CPC
27                         Generate the following cut and add it to rHC.s:
                            ˆ                    ˙ˆ                                   ˙
                               ř                         ř         ř
                                  z pCMPpx̄, Cqq    1`       ` Ť           ˘ pxr ´ 1q   ďθ
                              CPC                       CPC rP         Ω1` px̄,jq
                                                                 jPC

28                   end
29             end
30       end
31       if no cuts have been generated then
32             Save the solution result of calling the subproblem on the routes of Ω1` px̄q
33       end




                                                                          20
5          Computational results
We considered the 120-instance testbed of Montoya et al. (2017) (available from http://www.vrp-rep.org/). In this
testbed, there are six sets of 20 instances, each with 10, 20, 40, 80, 160, or 320 customers. The EVs are Peugeot
iOns which have a consumption rate of 0.125 kWh/km and a battery of 16 kWh. We note that in these instances
the triangular inequalities hold for energy consumption. However, this assumption is not necessary for our model and
solution method. When dealing with the E-VRP-NL-C, we adapted each instance by fixing a number of chargers for
each CS. We decided to consider instances in which all the CSs have one or two chargers.
    The first aim of our computational experiments is to assess the performance of a commercial MIP solver for solving
small-size instances of the E-VRP-NL-C using the path-based formulation introduced in Section 3 (although the primary
motivation for introducing the latter formulation was to give a precise definition of the problem). These results are
presented in §5.1. The second aim of our computational experiments is to assess the quality of the ILS presented in §4.1
as a solution method for the E-VRP-NL. A comparison with results from the literature is presented in §5.2. The third
aim of our experiments is to assess the effectiveness of our algorithmic framework to build high-quality solutions to the
E-VRP-NL-C. We compare the results given by our matheuristic according to the version of the subproblem selected
during the assembly phase. These results are presented in §5.3.
    We implemented all the algorithms using Java 8. In all the tables, the CPU time is given in seconds and rounded
to the nearest integer.


5.1          Results for the E-VRP-NL-C formulation
We considered the twenty 10-customer and the twenty 20-customer instances. We ran the path-based model with a
three-hour CPU time limit. We used Gurobi 8.1.1 through its Java API. The results were obtained using a standard PC
with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9700K processor clocked at 3.6 GHz, equipped with 128 GB RAM, and running Debian
GNU/Linux 10. Each instance was executed on a single thread.
    Table 2 reports the number of instances with a solution proven to be optimal (#Opt), the average CPU time in
seconds (Time) for these latter instances, and the average gap (Gap) for the remaining instances. We compute the gap
as pz ´ z LB q{z, where z is the objective function value of the best integer solution returned by the solver, and z LB is
the best lower bound retrieved by the solver. The detailed results for all the tested instances are reported in Appendix
E.1.
    Our results show that the path-based model cannot solve all the 10-customer instances to optimality within the CPU
time limit whereas the results in Froger et al. (2019) showed that they can be solved within an average computation
time of roughly four minutes when CS capacity constraints are ignored. We also observe that the 20-customer instances
are already very challenging for the model since zero instances were solved. As expected, since the linear relaxation
of the model is weak, we conclude that solving the MILP formulations with a commercial solver does not constitute
an efficient solution method for the E-VRP-NL-C. Still, 17 out of the 40 tested instances were optimally solved when
considering one or two chargers per CS (the number of chargers appears to have no impact).

Table 2: Computational results for the CS path-based formulation on the 10-customer and 20-customer in-
stances.


                                                       Capacity “ 1               Capacity “ 2
                                            |I|
                                                  #Opt     Time       Gap    #Opt     Time       Gap
                                            10        17     873      22%       17      776      19%
                                            20         0        -   32%˚          0        -   29%˚
       ˚
           : There are 16 out of 20 instances for which the solver reaches the CPU time limit without finding any solution. They are not
                                                      considered when computing the gap.




                                                                       21
5.2      Results for the E-VRP-NL
Since the route generator of our matheuristic essentially solves the E-VRP-NL, we wanted to assess its quality on this
problem. We considered the 120 instances of the original Montoya et al. (2017) testbed. Each instance was executed
on a single thread with 12 GB RAM and on a cluster of 27 computers, each having 12 cores and two Intel(R) Xeon®
X5675 3.07 GHz processors. We performed 10 test runs for each instance using Algorithm 2 and compared the results
with those obtained in the E-VRP-NL literature through two solutions methods: the metaheuristic of Montoya et al.
(2017) which combines an ILS with a heuristic concentration (ILS+HC), and the large neighborhood search (LNS) of
Koç et al. (2018). Table 3 shows the results of this comparison. Given a number of customers in the instances, it
reports for each solution method the number of BKS to the E-VRP-NL (#BKS), the average gap to the BKS (Gap),
and the average number of routes in the best computed solution (#R). We compute the gap as pz ´ z ˚ q{z, where z is the
objective function value of the best solution returned by the solution method, and z ˚ is the objective function value of
                                                                                                               ˚
the BKS. Table 3 also reports the average gap to the best average objective function value (Gap BA) as pzavg ´zavg q{zavg ,
                                                                                                                     ˚
where zavg is the average objective function value of the solutions obtained in 10 runs by the solution method, and zavg
is the best average (BA) objective function value obtained in 10 runs by one of the existing solution method for the
E-VRP-NL. The detailed results for all the tested instances are reported in Appendix E.2.

Table 3: Comparison of the results obtained by ILS with the results of Montoya et al. (2017) and Koç et al.
(2018) for the E-VRP-NL.


                     ILS + HC                                     LNS                                      ILS
          2.33 GHz processor - 16GB of RAM       3.6 GHz processor - 32 GB of RAM         3.07 GHz processor - 12 GB of RAM

   |I|   #BKS Gap BKS #R Gap BA Time #BKS Gap BKS #R Gap BA Time #BKS Gap BKS #R Gap BA Time

   10      20      0.0%   2.7    0.3%        6     20      0.0%     2.7    0.1%       8      20     0.0%    2.7   0.0%        5
   20      11      0.3%   3.7    0.7%     11       12      0.2%     3.6    0.4%     14       20     0.0%    3.6   0.0%        8
   40       3      1.0%   6.5    2.6%     35        6      0.9%     6.4    1.1%     45       20     0.0%    6.2   0.0%     20
   80       0      3.8%   9.2    5.4%     80        0      3.8%     8.8    3.8%     99       20     0.0%    8.6   0.0%     64
   160      0      7.3% 16.7     8.1%    568        0      7.7% 16.6       7.8%    632       20     0.0% 15.3     0.0%    295
   320      0     11.2% 32.6    12.6%   4398        0     11.7% 32.6      12.4%   4555       20     0.0% 29.0     0.0%   1118

   All     34      3.9% 11.9     4.9%    850       38      4.1% 11.8       4.3%    892      120     0.0% 10.9     0.0%   252
                                   ILS + HC: (Montoya et al., 2017), LNS: (Koç et al., 2018).




   The results presented in Table 3 clearly show that our ILS outperforms all existing methods for the E-VRP-NL. We
have identified 80 new BKS and matched the existing BKS for the remaining instances. We have improved the previous
solutions by about 4.0%. The improvement increases with the number of customers. The algorithm is also stable as
the average results on 10 test runs for each instance are better than those reported for previous methods. While it is
difficult to draw definitive conclusions on the computation times since these tests were run on different machines, it
seems that the ILS is at least as fast as the other methods, if not the fastest one. The major difference between our
method and the existing ones comes from the reoptimization of the charging decisions when evaluating a move and the
use of larger neighborhoods.


5.3      Results for the E-VRP-NL-C
We have performed several tests to assess the effectiveness of our matheuristic in obtaining high-quality solutions for
the E-VRP-NL-C. Each instance was executed on a single thread with 12 GB RAM and on a cluster of 27 computers,
each having 12 cores and two Intel(R) Xeon® X5675 3.07 GHz processors. We used Gurobi 7.5.0 (through its Java
API) to solve the MILP models.
   After some preliminary experiments, we set the values of the parameters of the matheuristic as presented in Table 4.
Setting the stopping criterion to 12 iterations and the number of ILS iterations to 200 proved to be a good compromise
between solution quality and computation time. In some rare cases we were not able to optimally solve the assembly phase
using version DWR of the subproblem. Indeed, when it is difficult to find a solution satisfying the CS capacity constraints


                                                               22
or when such a solution does not exist, the MILP formulation becomes computationally expensive. Nonetheless, after
testing higher CPU time limits for the second component, we observed that the impact on the results was negligible.

                                       Table 4: Value of the matheuristic parameters.


                                         nmax      α          Tmin        δ max          τ       τ SP

                                           12      0.9   0.67 ¨ Tmax      200          180 s      5s




   We first compare the results obtained by our matheuristic for the four versions of the subproblem used by the
solution assembler. For one or two chargers at each CS and each version of the subproblem, we performed 10 test runs
for each instance. Table 5 reports the best results obtained during our tests. Specifically, given a number of chargers
per CS and a selected version of the subproblem used in the branch-and-cut algorithm, this table reports the number
of instances with a solution in each of the 10 tests (#F), the number of instances with the best solution (BS) to the
E-VRP-NL-C computed all over our tests (#BS), including those of the path-based formulation, and the average gap
to the BS (Gap BS). Table 6 reports the average CPU time in seconds over 10 runs for the whole algorithm (T ), and
for the first (T1 ) and second (T2 ) components. It also reports the average gap with respect to the best average objective
function value obtained using a given version of the subproblem (Gap BA). The gaps are computed as in §5.2. Detailed
results for all the tested instances are reported in Appendix E.3.

Table 5: Comparison of the best results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according to the
version of the subproblem it uses and the number of chargers at each CS.


                                       Version N              Version D                Version DW         Version DWR
                 Capacity   |I|   #F #BS Gap BS #F #BS Gap BS #F #BS Gap BS #F #BS Gap BS

                            40    19      15    0.17%    19     18     0.01%      19      18     0.01%   19   19   0.00%
                            80    20      15    0.02%    20     20     0.00%      20      20     0.00%   20   20   0.00%
                            160   19       5    0.27%    20     13     0.06%      20      13     0.06%   20   15   0.09%
                     1
                            320   10       5    0.32%    20      1     0.28%      20         2   0.27%   20   13   0.10%

                            All   68     40     0.17%    79     52    0.09%     79       53      0.09%   79   67   0.05%

                            40    19      19    0.09%    20     20     0.00%      20      20     0.00%   20   20   0.00%
                            80    20      18    0.01%    20     20     0.00%      20      20     0.00%   20   19   0.01%
                            160   20      13    0.05%    20     10     0.18%      20      10     0.18%   20   14   0.09%
                     2
                            320   19       4    0.33%    20      9     0.12%      20         9   0.12%   20    8   0.17%

                            All   78     54     0.12%    80     59    0.08%     80       59      0.08%   80   61   0.07%




   First, it should be noted that our matheuristic returns an optimal solution for the 17 small-size instances for which
the MILP path formulation yields an optimal solution employing on average only around 2% of the computation time
the solver spent to reach the optimal solutions and less than 1% of the computation time the solver spent to prove
optimality. Considering that a single charger exists in each CS, we observe that using version N of the subproblem
prevents the algorithm from finding solutions to the E-VRP-NL-C for 15 instances. In this case, the algorithm finds the
best solution (computed all over our tests) for only 72 out of 120 instances. Delaying the starting time of the routes
yields better solutions for 20 more instances. In contrast, allowing waiting times in version DW leads to very marginal
improvements, compared with version D. Indeed, making the EVs wait for an available charger can eliminate capacity
violations only if at least two CSs are visited in a route; otherwise it is sufficient to make the EVs leave the depot after
time 0, as is done in version D. Although the same requirement (more than one CS) holds when allowing the revision
of the amount of energy charged at the CSs in version DWR, the latter strategy yields almost all the best solutions to
the E-VRP-NL-C.
   When increasing the number of chargers to two per CS, the capacity constraints become less binding and all our
assembly strategies yield very similar results. This was somewhat expected but it should be noted that delaying the


                                                                     23
Table 6: Comparison of the average results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according to
the version of the subproblem it uses and the number of chargers at each CS.


                            Version N                 Version D                  Version DW                 Version DWR
     Capacity   |I|   T     T1    T2 Gap BA     T     T1    T2   Gap BA    T     T1    T2   Gap BA    T     T1    T2    Gap BA

                40     24    23    1    0.31%    23    22    1     0.03%    23    22    1     0.03%    87    22    65     0.00%
                80     74    73    1    0.10%    74    73    1     0.00%    73    72    1     0.00%    74    73    1      0.04%
                160   340   335    5    0.45%   339   335    4     0.10%   340   336    4     0.10%   397   333   64      0.08%
                320 1345 1274     71    0.34% 1480 1253 227        0.17% 1487 1259 228        0.15% 1933 1244     689     0.05%
         1
                All   300   287 13      0.22%   322   283   39    0.05%    323   284   39     0.05%   418   281 137      0.03%

                40     23    23    0    0.05%    23    23    0     0.11%    23    23    1     0.09%    45    23    22     0.01%
                80     73    72    1    0.18%    73    73    1     0.19%    73    73    1     0.25%    73    73    1      0.14%
                160   336   334    2    0.24%   336   334    2     0.25%   337   335    2     0.24%   338   336     2     0.28%
                320 1340 1279     61    0.21% 1283 1276      7     0.12% 1276 1269      7     0.14% 1327 1269      58     0.08%
         2
                All   298   287 11      0.11%   288   287    2    0.11%    287   286    2     0.12%   300   286   14     0.09%




starting time of the routes increases the probability of ending up with a feasible solution.
   The first general conclusion is that allowing delays when solving the CS capacity management subproblem is a suitable
and efficient way of to assembling high-quality solutions to the E-VRP-NL-C. Allowing the revision of the amounts of
energy charged at the CSs on top of it significantly improves the results, but it is slightly more computationally expensive
(Table 6). We also note that in general, most of the computation time is spent generating routes as assembling a solution
is usually very fast, especially when a cutoff value is provided to the branch-and-cut algorithm. Not surprisingly the
computation time increases with the number of customers but it remains reasonable since it takes around 30 minutes
to tackle the largest instances.
   To assess the relevance of our cuts, we show in Table 7 the distribution of the different type of cuts generated in the
branch-and-cut tree. When the CS capacity constraints are very binding, the energy reasoning-based algorithm detects
infeasible route selections much more frequently than the fixed part-based algorithm. We observe that due to its high
degree of flexibility, compared with the other versions, DWR requires solving the MILP formulation more often. Indeed,
the two previously mentioned algorithms are weaker in that case since the mandatory part of each charging operation
may have a very short duration due to the potential revision of the amount of energy charged at the CSs. When we
increase the number of chargers at each CS, the fixed part-based and energy reasoning-based algorithms lead to the
generation of fewer cuts. This is not surprising since these are based on relaxations of the subproblem. However, they are
useful since the generated cuts are stronger, which avoids computationally expensive calls to the MILP solver. We also
see that integer optimality cuts are seldom generated. Since increases in the total time of the routes are penalized, the
algorithm tends to avoid adding waiting times. This indicates that revising the charging operations does not always lead
to an increase in time, and a trade-off between delay and a revision at no cost is often found. To support this conclusion,
we have analyzed the solutions returned by the matheuristic. Given the number of chargers at each CS, Table 8 reports
the percentage of solutions for which there exists at least one route with a delayed starting time, a waiting time before
a charging operation, and a revision of the amount of energy charged in the EV. We see that for most of the solutions
returned by the algorithm, satisfying the CS capacity constraints can be achieved without increasing the cost.
   Since we have imposed a CPU time limit for the branch-and-cut execution and since the maximum route duration
limit may decrease according to the state of the solution method, no version of the subproblem dominates the other
versions. To perform a fair comparison between the different strategies, and to quantify the benefit of allowing the
addition of waiting times and the revision of the amount of energy charged at the CSs, we took the 2,400 long-term
pools of routes obtained at the end of the matheuristic for version DWR of the subproblem. For every pool of routes,
we ran the branch-and-cut algorithm to generate the best E-VRP-NL-C solution. Table 9 reports for each version of
the subproblem the number of pool of routes for which the algorithm obtains a feasible solution (#F), as well as the
best solution (#Best) among those obtained with the other versions on the same pool. It also shows the average gap



                                                                  24
                      Table 7: Characteristics of the cuts generating in the solution assembly phase.


                                     Version D                              Version DW                                   Version DWR
               Capacity       FP        NRG          BF        FP       NRG            BF            BO       FP         NRG           BF      BO

                  1          2.3%       94.5%        3.2%     2.3%      95.0%          2.5%      0.2%         0.6%    16.9%           80.5%    2.0%
                  2          29.0%      28.2%       42.8%     28.9%     27.1%        42.5%       1.5%         1.3%        0.7%        96.2%    1.8%
   FP (feasibility cuts generated after calling the fixed part-based algorithm), NRG (feasibility cuts generated after calling the energy
  reasoning-based algorithm), BF (feasibility cuts of type generated after solving the MILP formulation), BO (optimality cuts of type
                                                    generated after solving the MILP formulation)




                              Table 8: Analysis of the solutions retrieved by the matheuristic.


                                          Version D          Version DW                              Version DWR
                             Capacity           “            “          ą          “             “         ą          ą           ą
                                                D            D          W          D          NRG          W         NRG          R

                                1               42.1%       42.2%     1.7%        42.0%       17.4%       1.3%       6.3%        2.5%
                                2               11.7%       11.7%     0.0%        11.4%        8.5%       0.0%       0.4%        0.0%
D (delay), W (waiting time), NRG (revision of the amount of energy charged), R (removal), “ (no increase of the total time), ą (increase
                                                                    of the total time)




between the solution returned and the best solution obtained during these tests under all the assembly strategies. The
conclusions are very similar to those drawn from the results of the matheuristic. Compared to version N, version DWR
makes nearly 400 extra routes feasible when assuming one charger. Not surprisingly, when increasing the number of
chargers, the results tend to be more independent of the selected version of the subproblem.

Table 9: Comparison of the results of the branch-and-cut algorithm according to the different versions of the
subproblem.


                             Version N                        Version D                          Version DW                            Version DWR
       Capacity       #F      #Best       Gap          #F      #Best         Gap          #F         #Best         Gap           #F      #Best        Gap

           1          1916     1361      0.315%       2262       2095       0.096%        2270         2112      0.091%      2307           2307    0.000%

           2          2321     2125      0.073%       2390       2371       0.013%        2390         2371      0.013%      2390           2390    0.000%




    Lastly, we compare the BKSs for the E-VRP-NL and those for the E-VRP-NL-C obtained for each instance in our
computational experiments. Table 10 reports aggregated results. The second column shows the number of BKSs to
the E-VRP-NL that are not feasible for the EVRP-NL-C. As expected, many BKSs to the E-VRP-NL are also BKSs
to the E-VRP-NL-C. Note that there is no obvious procedure to identify beforehand whether or not the CS capacity
constraints are binding for a given instance. The other columns focus on the case when the BKSs to the E-VRP-NL-
C and the E-VRP-NL are not equal. The third and fourth columns of the table show the number of BKSs that do
not have the same number of routes and the average gap in terms of the objective function between the BKSs to the
E-VRP-NL-C and the E-VRP-NL. We observe that i) the introduction of capacity constraints does not increase the
number of routes in the vast majority of the cases and ii) the increase in the objective function is limited. The fifth and
sixth columns of the table show the percentage of routes that make up the BKSs to both problems with and without
capacity (differentiating the case when the starting time is only delayed). Although the CS capacity is not problematic
in many instances, when it is, the solutions differ widely.
    When a violation of the CS capacity constraints is observed for a BKS to the E-VRP-NL, we tested the use of version
DWR of the capacity management subproblem to resolve it. We observed that 31 out of the 53 solutions and eight out
of the 12 solutions can be repaired into a feasible solution to the E-VRP-NL-C when the capacity is equal to one and


                                                                             25
      Table 10: Comparison between the best known solutions to the E-VRP-NL and the E-VRP-NL-C.


                  Number of instances where          Number of instances where         Increase in the
                                                                                                                 % of routes
    Capacity     the BKS to the E-VRP-NL is         the two BKSs have a different     objective function
               not feasible for the E-VRP-NL-C            number of routes                    value        “      delayed      ‰
                                ˚
        1                 53/119                                 4/53                         0.29%        36%      10%        54%
        2                  12/120                                1/12                         0.16%        38%       7%        55%
                                        ˚
                                            No solution is known for a particular instance.




two, respectively. We conclude that a risk is incurred if CS capacity constraints are only considered a posteriori.



6     Conclusion and perspectives
We have modeled and solved an electric vehicle routing problem that embeds several features such as piecewise linear
charging functions, multiple charging technologies, and multiple stops at CSs. Our methodology explicitly considers
the fact that the number of EVs simultaneously charging at every CS is limited by the number of chargers. We have
proposed a continuous-time path-based formulation of the E-VRP-NL-C. Our results show that optimally solving even
small-size instances of the problem with a commercial MILP solver running this formulation is challenging. To handle
larger instances, we have developed an algorithmic framework which iteratively calls a route generator and a solution
assembler. The first component focuses on generating a pool of high-quality and diversified routes from solutions to
the E-VRP-NL obtained by means of an ILS metaheuristic. Computational experiments have shown that this first
component produces high quality E-VRP-NL solutions. Indeed, we have improved 80 out of 120 best-known E-VRP-NL
solutions. The second component assembles a solution to the E-VRP-NL-C by selecting a subset of routes from the
generated pool. We decomposed this assembly problem into a route selection problem and a CS capacity management
subproblem. We have designed a branch-and-cut algorithm based on this decomposition scheme. We have developed and
compared four versions of the CS capacity management subproblem, including a simple check of the capacity constraints,
the introduction of waiting times, and the revision of the charging amounts. Our results show that there exists a serious
risk of ending up with no solution if the method disregards the CS capacity constraints or if the routes cannot be
modified by the subproblem. Delaying the starting time and revising the amount of energy charged at the visited CSs
lessens this risk. Using more complex strategies to solve capacity violation issues at CSs does not significantly increase
the computation time and yields better solutions. The matheuristic is also able to find all optimal solutions of small-size
instances.
    While our work focuses on CSs that are privately operated, it also applies if reserving chargers at CSs is possible
(which is very rare in practice). In this case, there may be time windows when chargers cannot be reserved. We can deal
with these periods of unavailability in our matheuristic by inserting dummy operations (fixed in time) in the capacity
management subproblem, and by slightly adapting the labeling algorithm used to insert charging decisions in the ILS.

    Acknowledgments— This research was partly funded by the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche through
project e-VRO (ANR-15-CE22-0005-01) and by the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council under
grants 436014-2013 and 2015-06189. This support is gratefully acknowledged.




                                                                26
References
Alvarenga, G. B., Mateus, G., and De Tomi, G. (2007). A genetic and set partitioning two-phase approach for the
  vehicle routing problem with time windows. Computers & Operations Research, 34(6):1561–1584.

Andelmin, J. and Bartolini, E. (2017). An exact algorithm for the green vehicle routing problem. Transportation Science,
  51(4):1288–1303.

Andelmin, J. and Bartolini, E. (2019). A multi-start local search heuristic for the Green Vehicle Routing Problem based
  on a multigraph reformulation. Computers & Operations Research, 109:43–63.

Artigues, C., Michelon, P., and Reusser, S. (2003). Insertion techniques for static and dynamic resource-constrained
  project scheduling. European Journal of Operational Research, 149(2):249–267.

Baptiste, P., Le Pape, C., and Nuijten, W. (2001). Constraint-based scheduling: applying constraint programming to
  scheduling problems, volume 39. Springer, Boston, MA.

Baum, M., Dibbelt, J., Gemsa, A., Wagner, D., and Zündorf, T. (2019). Shortest Feasible Paths with Charging Stops
  for Battery Electric Vehicles. Transportation Science, 53(6):1627–1655.

Baum, M., Dibbelt, J., Wagner, D., and Zündorf, T. (2020). Modeling and engineering constrained shortest path
  algorithms for battery electric vehicles. Transportation Science, 54(6):1571–1600.

Beek, O., Raa, B., Dullaert, W., and Vigo, D. (2018). An efficient implementation of a static move descriptor-based
  local search heuristic. Computers & Operations Research, 94:1–10.

Brandstätter, G., Leitner, M., and Ljubić, I. (2020). Location of charging stations in electric car sharing systems.
  Transportation Science, 54(5):1408–1438.

Bruglieri, M., Mancini, S., Pezzella, F., and Pisacane, O. (2019a). A path-based solution approach for the Green Vehicle
  Routing Problem. Computers & Operations Research, 103:109–122.

Bruglieri, M., Mancini, S., and Pisacane, O. (2019b). The green vehicle routing problem with capacitated alternative
  fuel stations. Computers & Operations Research, 112:104759.

Bruglieri, M., Mancini, S., and Pisacane, O. (2019c). More efficient formulations and valid inequalities for the Green
  Vehicle Routing Problem. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 105:283–296.

Bruglieri, M., Mancini, S., and Pisacane, O. (2021). A more efficient cutting planes approach for the green vehicle
  routing problem with capacitated alternative fuel stations. Optimization Letters.

Codato, G. and Fischetti, M. (2006). Combinatorial Benders’ cuts for mixed-integer linear programming. Operations
  Research, 54(4):756–766.

Desaulniers, G., Errico, F., Irnich, S., and Schneider, M. (2016). Exact algorithms for electric vehicle-routing problems
  with time windows. Operations Research, 64(6):1388–1405.

Desaulniers, G., Gschwind, T., and Irnich, S. (2020). Variable Fixing for Two-Arc Sequences in Branch-Price-and-Cut
  Algorithms on Path-Based Models. Transportation Science, 54(5):1170–1188.

Drexl, M. (2012). Synchronization in vehicle routing – a survey of vrps with multiple synchronization constraints.
  Transportation Science, 46(3):297–316.

El Hachemi, N., Gendreau, M., and Rousseau, L.-M. (2013). A heuristic to solve the synchronized log-truck scheduling
  problem. Computers & Operations Research, 40(3):666–673.

Erdoğan, S. and Miller-Hooks, E. (2012). A green vehicle routing problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
  and Transportation Review, 48(1):100–114.


                                                           27
Felipe, A., Ortuño, M. T., Righini, G., and Tirado, G. (2014). A heuristic approach for the green vehicle routing problem
  with multiple technologies and partial recharges. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
  Review, 71:111–128.

Froger, A., Mendoza, J. E., Jabali, O., and Laporte, G. (2019). Improved formulations and algorithmic components for
  the electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging functions. Computers & Operations Research, 104:256–
  294.

Gnann, T., Funke, S., Jakobsson, N., Plötz, P., Sprei, F., and Bennehag, A. (2018). Fast charging infrastructure for
  electric vehicles: Today’s situation and future needs. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment,
  62:314–329.

Goeke, D. and Schneider, M. (2015). Routing a mixed fleet of electric and conventional vehicles. European Journal of
  Operational Research, 245(1):81–99.

Grangier, P., Gendreau, M., Lehuédé, F., and Rousseau, L.-M. (2017). A matheuristic based on large neighborhood
  search for the vehicle routing problem with cross-docking. Computers & Operations Research, 84:116–126.

Grimault, A., Bostel, N., and Lehuédé, F. (2017). An adaptive large neighborhood search for the full truckload pickup
  and delivery problem with resource synchronization. Computers & Operations Research, 88:1–14.

Hempsch, C. and Irnich, S. (2008). Vehicle routing problems with inter-tour resource constraints. In Golden, B.,
  Raghavan, S., and Wasil, E., editors, The Vehicle Routing Problem: Latest Advances and New Challenges, pages
  421–444. Springer, Boston, MA.

Hiermann, G., Hartl, R. F., Puchinger, J., and Vidal, T. (2019). Routing a mix of conventional, plug-in hybrid, and
  electric vehicles. European Journal of Operational Research, 272(1):235–248.

Hiermann, G., Puchinger, J., Ropke, S., and Hartl, R. F. (2016). The electric fleet size and mix vehicle routing problem
  with time windows and recharging stations. European Journal of Operational Research, 252(3):995–1018.

Juan, A. A., Mendez, C. A., Faulin, J., de Armas, J., and Grasman, S. E. (2016). Electric vehicles in logistics and
  transportation: A survey on emerging environmental, strategic, and operational challenges. Energies, 9(2):86.

Keskin, M. and Çatay, B. (2018). A matheuristic method for the electric vehicle routing problem with time windows
  and fast chargers. Computers & Operations Research, 100:172–188.

Keskin, M. and Çatay, B. (2016). Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time windows.
  Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 65:111–127.

Keskin, M., Laporte, G., and Çatay, B. (2019). Electric vehicle routing problem with time-dependent waiting times at
  recharging stations. Computers & Operations Research, 107:77–94.

Koç, Ç. and Karaoglan, I. (2016). The green vehicle routing problem: A heuristic based exact solution approach. Applied
  Soft Computing, 39:154–164.

Koç, Ç., Jabali, O., Mendoza, J. E., and Laporte, G. (2018). The electric vehicle routing problem with shared charging
  stations. International Transactions in Operational Research, 26(4):1211–1243.

Kullman, N. D., Goodson, J. C., and Mendoza, J. E. (2021). Electric Vehicle Routing with Public Charging Stations.
  Transportation Science, 55(3):637–659.

Lam, E. and Van Hentenryck, P. (2016). A branch-and-price-and-check model for the vehicle routing problem with
  location congestion. Constraints, 21(3):1–19.

Lee, C. (2020). An exact algorithm for the electric-vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging time. Journal of
  the Operational Research Society, page doi: 10.1080/01605682.2020.1730250.


                                                           28
Leggieri, V. and Haouari, M. (2017). A practical solution approach for the green vehicle routing problem. Transportation
  Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 104:97–112.

Lourenço, H. R., Martin, O. C., and Stützle, T. (2003). Iterated local search. In Glover, F. and Kochenberger, G. A.,
  editors, Handbook of metaheuristics, volume 57, pages 320–353. Springer, Boston, MA.

Macrina, G., Di Puglia Pugliese, L., Guerriero, F., and Laporte, G. (2019). The green mixed fleet vehicle routing
  problem with partial battery recharging and time windows. Computers & Operations Research, 101:183–199.

Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J., and Villegas, J. (2016). A multi-space sampling heuristic for the green vehicle
  routing problem. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 70:113–128.

Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J. E., and Villegas, J. G. (2017). The electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear
  charging function. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 103:87–110.

Morais, V. W. C., Mateus, G. R., and Noronha, T. F. (2014). Iterated local search heuristics for the vehicle routing
  problem with cross-docking. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(16):7495–7506.

Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., and Laporte, G. (2016). 50th anniversary invited article—goods distribution with electric
  vehicles: Review and research perspectives. Transportation Science, 50(1):3–22.

Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., and Laporte, G. (2018). Charge scheduling for electric freight vehicles. Transportation Research
  Part B: Methodological, 115:246–269.

Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., Laporte, G., and Veneroni, M. (2017). Battery degradation and behaviour for electric vehicles:
  Review and numerical analyses of several models. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 103:158–187.

Rix, G., Rousseau, L.-M., and Pesant, G. (2015). A column generation algorithm for tactical timber transportation
  planning. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 66(2):278–287.

Roberti, R. and Wen, M. (2016). The electric traveling salesman problem with time windows. Transportation Research
  Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 89:32–52.

Sassi, O. and Oulamara, A. (2014). Joint scheduling and optimal charging of electric vehicles problem. In Murgante,
  B., Misra, S., Rocha, A. M. A. C., Torre, C., Rocha, J. G., Falcão, M. I., Taniar, D., Apduhan, B. O., and Gervasi,
  O., editors, Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA 2014, volume 8580, pages 76–91, Cham. Springer.

Schiffer, M., Schneider, M., and Laporte, G. (2018a). Designing sustainable mid-haul logistics networks with intra-route
  multi-resource facilities. European Journal of Operational Research, 265(2):517–532.

Schiffer, M., Stütz, S., and Walther, G. (2018b). Electric commercial vehicles in mid-haul logistics networks. In Pistoia,
  G. and Liaw, B., editors, Behaviour of Lithium-Ion Batteries in Electric Vehicles, pages 153–173. Springer, Cham.

Schneider, M., Stenger, A., and Goeke, D. (2014). The electric vehicle-routing problem with time windows and recharging
  stations. Transportation Science, 48(4):500–520.

Schneider, M., Stenger, A., and Hof, J. (2015). An adaptive VNS algorithm for vehicle routing problems with interme-
  diate stops. OR Spectrum, 37(2):353–387.

Subramanian, A., Uchoa, E., and Ochi, L. S. (2013). A hybrid algorithm for a class of vehicle routing problems.
  Computers & Operations Research, 40(10):2519–2531.

Villegas, J. G., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J. E., and Montoya, A. (2018). The technician routing and scheduling problem with
  conventional and electric vehicle. Working paper available at https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01813887.

Villegas, J. G., Prins, C., Prodhon, C., Medaglia, A. L., and Velasco, N. (2013). A matheuristic for the truck and trailer
  routing problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 230(2):231–244.

Zachariadis, E. E. and Kiranoudis, C. T. (2010). A strategy for reducing the computational complexity of local search-
  based methods for the vehicle routing problem. Computers & Operations Research, 37(12):2089–2105.


                                                            29
A      Experiments on the feasibility of solutions from the literature
       when considering capacitated CSs
We verified the feasibility of the 120 best-known solutions (BKSs) for the E-VRP-NL reported in Montoya et al. (2017),
by limiting the number of chargers per CS to one, two, three, and four. Table 11 presents the results of our experiments.
We observe that if there exists only one charger at each CS, then almost half of the solutions are infeasible (i.e., they
violate the capacity constraints). This proportion drops to 11% when allowing two chargers per station, and four
chargers at each CS are needed to ensure the feasibility of all solutions. In practice, however, there are usually only one
or two chargers available at each CS.

Table 11: Results of the feasibility tests performed on the best solutions obtained in (Montoya et al., 2017)
(All CSs have the same number of chargers).


                Experiment     # Infeasible solutions       Average duration with         Average #EVs during
                                                                 capacity violation          capacity violation
                    C1                 55/120                           32 min                      2.1
                    C2                 23/120                           23 min                      3.2
                    C3                  3/120                           33 min                      4.0
                    C4                  0/120                           0 min                       0.0




B      Implementation details for the ILS
Our implementation of the ILS is based on the static move descriptor (SMD) concept. An SMD is static information
that describes a move independently of the current solution. A cost tag is associated with every SMD to store its
evaluation and it is updated throughout the LS. By storing SMDs in special data structures, one can access and update
the moves in an efficient way in order to reduce computation time. Specifically, SMDs are stored in a priority queue
(PQ) and organized according to their dynamic cost tag. The exploration of a neighborhood consists in looping over
the PQ until a feasible SMD can be applied. Then, to avoid unnecessary reevaluations of moves, only the cost tag
of the SMDs impacted by the previously applied SMD is updated. One major difference with the previous use of the
SMD framework lies in the complexity of the evaluation of the moves. To our knowledge, until now there has been
an emphasis on feasibility issues when using the SMD framework. Indeed, since checking the feasibility of each move
can be time consuming, this is only done during the exploration phase of the neighborhood. In our case, not only the
feasibility of a move can be computationally expensive to check, but also its evaluation.
    Our SMD implementation is inspired by the one proposed by Beek et al. (2018) who implemented the PQ with a
binary heap1 . For every operator, we use a matrix data structure to store all the SMDs. We build these matrices during
the initialization phase of the algorithm and we store them during the entire runtime of the algorithm. To avoid a
computationally expensive initialization phase of the ILS, the cost tag of each SMD is set equal to the value computed
after the first step of the evaluation (see §4.1.1). Since we are only interested in the moves that can potentially improve
the current solution, only those SMDs with a cost tag strictly below 0 need consideration (we refer to them as improving
SMDs). Throughout the algorithm, we use two binary heaps to store potentially improving SMDs: an “exact” binary
heap (EBH) for the SMDs that are exactly evaluated and a “approximate” binary heap (ABH) for the remaining SMDs.
In the initialization of the algorithm, we add to EBH all the improving SMDs that are exactly evaluated using the
first step, and we add to ABH the other improving SMDs. When we start exploring a neighborhood, we apply the
first move in EBH if it is not empty. Otherwise, we iterate over ABH. We apply the second step of the evaluation to
compute the exact cost tag of each SMD in ABH until we find an improving move or we reach the end of the heap.
   1 A binary heap is a complete binary tree satisfying the heap ordering property: the value of the key stored in each node is less

than or equal to the value of the keys in the node’s children.



                                                                   30
After selecting a move m, we update the values of the SMDs if they contain at least one node in the routes impacted by
m. Although in some cases the cost tag of a certain number of these SMDs may remain identical, we want to keep the
SMD framework as simple as possible. To avoid a computationally expensive update phase, each cost tag is set equal
to the value computed during the first step evaluation. It can therefore be a lower bound on the exact evaluation of
the move. In contrast with Beek et al. (2018), we keep cross-operator effects, meaning that we update the cost tag of
SMDs associated with other operators. However, we perform this update for the other operators only when the search
moves to them. To this end, we associate with each route the iteration number for which has been lastly updated, and
to each operator the iteration number for which it has last been called (we increment the iteration number each time
the search accepts a move or changes operator).



C      Algorithmic details for the ILS
Algorithm 5 describes the general scheme of the VND search phase. Algorithm 6 describes the move evaluation procedure.

 Algorithm 5: The VND algorithm
    Input : a solution s0 to the E-VRP-NL and a maximum route duration limit T
    Output: a solution sR to the E-VRP-NL and a solution sO (possibly equal to NULL) to the E-VRP-NL-C
    Procedure VND(s0 ,T ):
       /* We denote f psq the value of the objective function for a solution s and we assume f pNULLq “ `8*/
       sR Ð s0 , sO Ð NULL, k Ð 0
       N Ð r(1-0,2-0 vertex exchanges), (1-1,2-1,2-2 vertex exchanges), (2-opt intra and inter-routes), separates
       while k ă |N | do
             /* The procedure searchpN rks, s, T q searches an improving solution to s in the neighborhood N rks respecting the
                maximum route duration limit T .   It uses Algorithm 6 for move evaluation */
             s1 Ð searchpN rks, sR , T q /* s1 “ NULL if no improving solution is found */
             if s1 is a solution to the E-VRP-NL-C and f ps1 q ă f psO q then sO Ð s1
             if f ps1 q ă f psR q then sR Ð s1 , k Ð 0
             else k Ð k ` 1
       end
       return psR , sO q




                                                                 31
 Algorithm 6: Evaluation of a move
    Input : a move m and a maximum route duration limit T
    Output: a couple (c,b) where c is a lower estimation of the move evaluation and b is a boolean equal to true if the move
               is exactly evaluated or if it is a non-improving move and it is equal to false otherwise.
    Procedure EvaluateMove(m,T ):
        /* The evaluation of an infeasible move is set to 8 */
        b Ð true, c Ð ´CurrentDuration(Rm ) /* Rm denotes the routes impacted by move m */
        /* Let R1m denotes the newly created or modified routes obtained after applying move m */
        for each route r P R1m do
            t Ð DurationWithoutCharging(r)
              if t ą T then return (8,true) /* The move m is infeasible */ ;
              if EnergyConsumptionWithoutCharging(r)ď Q then
                  (cr ,br ) Ð (t,true)
              else
                    t Ð t ` DetourAndChargingDurationLB(r) /* The computation of the lower bound
                    if t ą T then return (8,true) /* The move m is infeasible */ ;
                    if the duration of r is in the cache memory then (cr ,br ) Ð (DurationFromMemory(r),true) else (cr ,br ) Ð
                     (t,false)
              end
              c Ð c ` cr
              if br “ false then b Ð false
        end
        if c ě 0 then b Ð true /* The move m is non-improving */
        return (c,b)



D      Algorithmic details for the branch-and-cut algorithm
Algorithm 7 describes the procedure to check the CS capacity constraints for version N of the subproblem. Algorithm
8 and Algorithm 9 provide a detailed description of the fixed part-based and energy reasoning-based algorithms.

 Algorithm 7: Checking the violation of capacity constraints for version N of the subproblem
    Input : a list of charging operations L numbered from 1 to n (Lris denotes the operation at position i in the list L) / an
               integer number C ě 1 representing the maximum number of operations that can be scheduled simultaneously
    Output: a set containing all the maximal subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity
               constraint
    Procedure CheckCapacityCut(O,C):
        Sort the operations in L in non-decreasing order of their starting time /* if two charging operations have the same
           starting time, then the charging operation with the minimum duration comes first */
        O Ð H /* subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity constraint*/
        U Ð tLr1su /* subset of charging operations currently executed */
        k Ð 2, excess Ð f alse
        while k ď n do
              for every operation o P U do
                    if SpLrksq ě Spoq ` dpoq then
                         if excess then O Ð O Y tU u, excess Ð false
                          U Ð U ztou
                    end
              end
              U Ð U Y tLrksu
              if |U | ą C then excess Ð true
        end
        if excess then O Ð O Y tU u
        return U




                                                                 32
 Algorithm 8: The fixed part-based algorithm
      Input : a list of charging operations O numbered from 1 to n (Orks denotes the operation at position k in the list O) /
                 an integer number C ě 1 representing the maximum number of operations that can be scheduled
                 simultaneously
      Output: a set containing all the maximal subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity
                 constraint
 1    Procedure FixedPartAlgorithm(O,C):
 2        Remove from O all the charging operations such that LSpoq ě ESpoq ` dpoq
 3        Sort the operations in O in non-decreasing order of starting time /* if two charging operations have the same
              starting time, then the charging operation with the minimum duration comes first */
 4        O Ð H /* subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity constraint */
 5        U Ð tOr1su /* subset of charging operations currently executed */
 6        k Ð 2, excess Ð false
 7        while k ď n do
 8              for every operation o P U do
 9                    if LSOrks ě ESpoq ` dpoq then
 10                         if excess then O Ð O Y tU u, excess Ð false
 11                         U Ð U ztou
12                    end
13              end
14              U Ð U Y tOrksu
15              if |U | ą C then excess Ð true
16              k Ðk`1
17        end
18        if excess then O Ð O Y tU u
19        return O



 Algorithm 9: The energy reasoning-based algorithm
      Input : a set of charging operations O / an integer number C ě 1 representing the maximum number of operations
                 that can be scheduled simultaneously
      Output: a set containing all subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity constraint
 1 Procedure EnergyAlgorithm(O,C):
             Ť
 2    T1 :“ oPO ptESpoqu Y tESpoq ` dpoqu Y tLSpoquq
             Ť
 3    T2 :“ oPO ptLSpoq ` dpoqu Y tESpoq ` dpoqu Y tLSpoquq
              Ť
 4    T ptq :“ oPO tESpoq ` LSpoq ` dpoq ´ tu
 5        T “ tpt1 , t2 q P T1 ˆ T2 u Y tpt1 , t2 q P T1 ˆ T pt1 qu Y tpt1 , t2 q P T pt2 q ˆ T2 u
 6        O Ð H /* subsets of charging operations leading to a violation of the CS capacity constraint */
 7        for pt1 , t2 q P T do
                /* W po, t1 , t2 q :“ mint0, t2 ´ t1 , p`         ´              `
                                                        o pt1 q, po pt2 qu with po pt1 q :“ maxt0, dpoq ´ maxt0, t1 ´ ESpoquu (duration during

                   which o is executed after time t1 if it is scheduled as soon as possible) and
                   p´
                    o pt2 q :“ maxt0, dpoq ´ maxt0, LSpoq ` dpoq ´ t2 uu (duration during which o is executed before time t2 if it is

                   scheduled as late as possible) */
                           ř
 8              if t1 ă t2 ^ oPO W po, t1 , t2 q ą Cpt2 ´ t1 q then
                           Ť
 9                    O Ð O tto P O : W po, t1 , t2 q ą 0uu
10              end
11        end
12        return O



E        Detailed computational results
Based on notation introduced by Montoya et al. (2017), we write each instance using the symbol tcγ1 cγ2 sγ3 cγ4 # where
γ1 is the method used to place the customers (i.e., 0: randomization, 1: mixture of randomization and clustering, 2:
clustering), γ2 is the number of customers, γ3 is the number of the CSs, γ4 is ‘t’ if we use a p-median heuristic to locate



                                                                            33
Table 12: Detailed results for the path-based MILP formulation on 10-customer and 20-customer instances.


                                                        Capacity“ 1        Capacity“ 2
                                          Instance
                                                        Obj      Time      Obj     Time
                                          tc0c10s2cf1   19.75        51    19.75     58
                                          tc0c10s2ct1   12.30        43    12.30     45
                                          tc0c10s3cf1   19.75    4838      19.75   3825
                                          tc0c10s3ct1   10.80        91    10.80     96
                                          tc1c10s2cf2    9.03        18     9.03     19
                                          tc1c10s2cf3   16.37        373   16.37    200
                                          tc1c10s2cf4   16.10        80    16.10     64
                                          tc1c10s2ct2   10.75    3198      10.75   3602
                                          tc1c10s2ct3   13.17        20    13.17     16
                                          tc1c10s2ct4   13.83        24    13.83     17
                                          tc1c10s3cf2    9.03        64     9.03     38
                                          tc1c10s3cf3   16.37        730   16.37   1208
                                          tc1c10s3cf4   14.90        350   14.90    270
                                          tc1c10s3ct2    9.20    2173       9.20   1494
                                          tc1c10s3ct3   13.02        264   13.02    201
                                          tc1c10s3ct4   13.21        116   13.21    107
                                          tc2c10s2cf0   21.77    T.L.      21.77   T.L.
                                          tc2c10s2ct0   12.45    2407      12.45   1932
                                          tc2c10s3cf0   21.77    T.L.      21.77   T.L.
                                          tc2c10s3ct0   11.51    T.L.      11.51   T.L.
                                          tc0c20s3cf2   27.94    T.L.      28.33   T.L.
                                          tc0c20s3ct2   17.37    T.L.      17.60   T.L.
                                          tc0c20s4cf2      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc0c20s4ct2   18.39    T.L.      18.23   T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3cf1   22.37    T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3cf3      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3cf4      *     T.L.      19.29   T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3ct1      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3ct3      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s3ct4      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4cf1      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4cf3      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4cf4      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4ct1      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4ct3      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc1c20s4ct4      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc2c20s3cf0      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc2c20s3ct0      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc2c20s4cf0      *     T.L.         *    T.L.
                                          tc2c20s4ct0      *     T.L.         *    T.L.




T.L.: CPU time limit reached

   ˚: no feasible solution found within the CPU time limit.


the CSs and ‘f’ otherwise, and # is the number of the instance for each combination of parameters (i.e., # = 0 , 1 , 2 ,
3 , 4).


E.1       Detailed results for the E-VRP-NL-C formulation
Table 12 reports the detailed results obtained by a commercial MILP solver (Gurobi) for solving the E-VRP-NL-C using
the CS path-based formulation.


E.2       Detailed results for the E-VRP-NL
Tables 13 and 14 report the detailed results obtained by our ILS and two methods from the literature on the E-VRP-NL
(Montoya et al., 2017; Koç et al., 2018). The best values (objective function value of the BKS and best average value
of the objective function obtained over 10 runs) are indicated in boldface.


E.3       Detailed results for the E-VRP-NL-C
Tables 15, 16, 17, and 18 report the detailed results obtained by our matheuristic on the E-VRP-NL-C instances. The
best values (objective function value of the BKS and best average value of the objective function obtained over 10 runs)
are indicated in boldface.



                                                                34
Table 13: Detailed comparison of the results obtained by ILS with the results of Montoya et al. (2017) and
Koç et al. (2018) for the E-VRP-NL (instances with 10, 20, or 40 customers)


                                      ILS + HC        LNS           ILS                    ILS + HC          LNS             ILS
                Instance      BKS     Best    #R   Best     #R   Best     #R      BA      Avg     Time    Avg     Time   Avg     Time
                tc0c10s2cf1   19.75   19.75    3   19.75     3   19.75        3   19.75   20.12       4   19.77      8   19.75      5
                tc0c10s2ct1   12.30   12.30    2   12.30     2   12.30        2   12.30   12.34       4   12.31      8   12.30      3
                tc0c10s3cf1   19.75   19.75    3   19.75     3   19.75        3   19.75   20.12       4   19.76      7   19.75      5
                tc0c10s3ct1   10.80   10.80    2   10.80     2   10.80        2   10.80   10.80       5   10.81      8   10.80      5
                tc1c10s2cf2    9.03    9.03    3    9.03     3    9.03        3    9.03    9.07       2    9.04      9    9.03      4
                tc1c10s2cf3   16.37   16.37    3   16.37     3   16.37        3   16.37   16.37       6   16.38      9   16.37      5
                tc1c10s2cf4   16.10   16.10    3   16.10     3   16.10        3   16.10   16.10       5   16.11      7   16.10      5
                tc1c10s2ct2   10.75   10.75    3   10.75     3   10.75        3   10.75   10.75       4   10.76      8   10.75      3
                tc1c10s2ct3   13.17   13.17    2   13.17     2   13.17        2   13.17   13.18       8   13.18      9   13.17      6
                tc1c10s2ct4   13.83   13.83    2   13.83     2   13.83        2   13.83   13.83       5   13.84      9   13.83      5
                tc1c10s3cf2    9.03    9.03    3    9.03     3    9.03        3    9.03    9.06       2    9.04     10    9.03      5
                tc1c10s3cf3   16.37   16.37    3   16.37     3   16.37        3   16.37   16.37       6   16.39      8   16.37      3
                tc1c10s3cf4   14.90   14.90    3   14.90     3   14.90        3   14.90   14.90       7   14.91      8   14.90      2
                tc1c10s3ct2    9.20    9.20    3    9.20     3    9.20        3    9.20    9.34       5    9.21      9    9.20      6
                tc1c10s3ct3   13.02   13.02    2   13.02     2   13.02        2   13.02   13.02     10    13.03      7   13.02      5
                tc1c10s3ct4   13.21   13.21    2   13.21     2   13.21        2   13.21   13.21       6   13.22      9   13.21      5
                tc2c10s2cf0   21.77   21.77    3   21.77     3   21.77        3   21.77   21.77       9   21.78      8   21.77      6
                tc2c10s2ct0   12.45   12.45    3   12.45     3   12.45        3   12.45   12.45       5   12.46      8   12.45      6
                tc2c10s3cf0   21.77   21.77    3   21.77     3   21.77        3   21.77   21.77       9   21.79      7   21.77      3
                tc2c10s3ct0   11.51   11.51    3   11.51     3   11.51        3   11.51   11.54       7   11.52      9   11.51      5
                tc0c20s3cf2   27.47   27.60    4   27.47     4   27.47        4   27.47   27.66     12    27.52     12   27.47     10
                tc0c20s3ct2   17.08   17.08    3   17.08     3   17.08        3   17.08   17.13       8   17.11     18   17.08      6
                tc0c20s4cf2   27.47   27.48    4   27.60     4   27.47        4   27.47   27.61     13    27.65     14   27.47      9
                tc0c20s4ct2   16.99   16.99    3   16.99     3   16.99        3   16.99   17.10       9   17.02     16   16.99      9
                tc1c20s3cf1   17.49   17.50    3   17.50     3   17.49        3   17.49   17.53     12    17.53     13   17.49     10
                tc1c20s3cf3   16.44   16.63    4   16.48     3   16.44        3   16.44   16.78       8   16.50     17   16.44      7
                tc1c20s3cf4   17.00   17.00    4   17.00     4   17.00        4   17.00   17.00       4   17.03     15   17.00      5
                tc1c20s3ct1   18.94   18.95    4   18.95     4   18.94        4   18.94   19.38     15    18.97     14   18.94      9
                tc1c20s3ct3   12.60   12.65    3   12.60     3   12.60        3   12.60   12.72       9   12.62     17   12.60      9
                tc1c20s3ct4   16.21   16.21    4   16.21     4   16.21        4   16.21   16.25       5   16.24     11   16.21      8
                tc1c20s4cf1   16.38   16.39    4   16.47     3   16.38        4   16.38   16.40     13    16.49     18   16.38      6
                tc1c20s4cf3   16.44   16.56    3   16.48     3   16.44        3   16.44   16.80       9   16.51     11   16.44     11
                tc1c20s4cf4   17.00   17.00    4   17.00     4   17.00        4   17.00   17.00       4   17.03     15   17.00      8
                tc1c20s4ct1   17.80   18.25    4   18.25     4   17.80        4   17.80   18.32     16    18.28     18   17.80     11
                tc1c20s4ct3   14.43   14.43    3   14.43     3   14.43        3   14.43   14.50       8   14.46     12   14.43      7
                tc1c20s4ct4   17.00   17.00    4   17.00     4   17.00        4   17.00   17.00       6   17.03     11   17.00      6
                tc2c20s3cf0   24.68   24.68    4   24.68     4   24.68        4   24.68   24.68     14    24.70     11   24.68      7
                tc2c20s3ct0   25.79   25.79    4   25.79     4   25.79        4   25.79   25.79     15    25.83     15   25.79     10
                tc2c20s4cf0   24.67   24.67    4   24.67     4   24.67        4   24.67   24.69     15    24.71     13   24.67     11
                tc2c20s4ct0   26.02   26.02    4   26.03     4   26.02        4   26.02   26.02     15    26.07     16   26.02      9
                tc0c40s5cf0   32.20   32.67    8   32.67     8   32.20        7   32.30   33.25     24    32.75     52   32.30     16
                tc0c40s5cf4   30.25   30.77    6   30.60     6   30.25        6   30.25   31.49     33    30.69     49   30.25     22
                tc0c40s5ct0   27.91   28.72    7   28.70     7   27.91        6   27.91   29.35     25    28.78     46   27.91     17
                tc0c40s5ct4   28.63   28.63    6   29.17     5   28.63        6   28.63   28.72     33    29.25     59   28.63     18
                tc0c40s8cf0   30.40   31.28    7   31.23     7   30.40        6   30.40   32.02     34    31.31     63   30.40     18
                tc0c40s8cf4   28.11   29.32    6   28.25     5   28.11        5   28.23   29.86     43    28.30     52   28.23     25
                tc0c40s8ct0   26.22   26.35    6   26.22     6   26.22        6   26.22   26.89     29    26.27     58   26.22     17
                tc0c40s8ct4   29.07   29.20    6   29.22     6   29.07        5   29.07   29.27     47    29.28     48   29.07     22
                tc1c40s5cf1   64.51   65.16   10   65.52    10   64.51    10      64.51   66.03     44    65.67     33   64.51     25
                tc1c40s5ct1   52.33   52.68    9   52.60     9   52.33        8   52.33   53.36     59    52.72     40   52.33     23
                tc1c40s8cf1   40.64   40.75    7   41.63     7   40.64        7   40.64   42.33     70    41.71     34   40.64     21
                tc1c40s8ct1   40.18   40.56    7   40.56     7   40.18        7   40.18   41.19     71    40.67     49   40.18     24
                tc2c40s5cf2   27.54   27.54    6   27.54     6   27.54        6   27.54   27.67     32    27.62     42   27.54     17
                tc2c40s5cf3   19.65   19.74    5   19.65     5   19.65        5   19.65   20.18     17    19.70     50   19.65     21
                tc2c40s5ct2   26.91   26.91    6   26.91     6   26.91        6   26.91   27.02     23    26.99     42   26.91     14
                tc2c40s5ct3   23.39   23.54    6   23.71     6   23.39        6   23.39   23.77     26    23.75     51   23.39     22
                tc2c40s8cf2   27.13   27.15    6   27.14     6   27.13        6   27.13   27.31     29    27.20     35   27.13     16
                tc2c40s8cf3   19.65   19.66    5   19.65     5   19.65        5   19.65   20.24     19    19.69     36   19.65     22
                tc2c40s8ct2   26.28   26.33    6   26.29     6   26.28        6   26.28   26.71     26    26.34     40   26.28     16
                tc2c40s8ct3   22.45   22.71    5   22.45     5   22.45        5   22.45   23.23     25    22.52     30   22.45     24




                                                                         35
Table 14: Detailed comparison of the results obtained by ILS with the results of Montoya et al. (2017) and
Koç et al. (2018) for the E-VRP-NL (instances with 80, 160, or 320 customers)


                                      ILS + HC         LNS           ILS                      ILS + HC           LNS              ILS
             Instance        BKS      Best     #R   Best     #R    Best    #R        BA       Avg     Time    Avg     Time     Avg      Time
             tc0c80s12cf0     34.16    34.64    9    35.24    8    34.16       8     34.16    35.59     57    35.40     105    34.16      66
             tc0c80s12cf1     40.91    42.90   10    42.30    9    40.91       9     40.94    44.07     75    42.47      85    40.94      68
             tc0c80s12ct0     37.51    39.31    9    39.27    9    37.51       8     38.08    39.83     66    39.41      86    38.08      65
             tc0c80s12ct1     39.91    41.94   10    41.64    9    39.91       9     40.06    43.03     73    41.83     103    40.06      59
             tc0c80s8cf0      39.08    39.43    9    40.64   10    39.08       9     39.16    39.86     56    40.77      88    39.16      48
             tc0c80s8cf1      43.38    45.23   10    46.65    9    43.38       9     43.95    45.73    121    46.80      98    43.95      73
             tc0c80s8ct0      40.52    41.90   10    41.44    9    40.52       9     41.44    42.76     54    41.59      87    41.44      61
             tc0c80s8ct1      43.85    45.27   10    45.25   10    43.85       9     44.07    45.85    130    45.37    100     44.07      73
             tc1c80s12cf2     28.65    29.54    8    29.54    8    28.65       7     28.77    30.73     61    29.66     113    28.77      52
             tc1c80s12ct2     28.73    29.52    8    29.38    8    28.73       8     29.18    30.66     59    29.47     114    29.18      54
             tc1c80s8cf2      29.15    30.81    8    31.38    8    29.15       8     29.15    31.83     51    31.47      94    29.15      51
             tc1c80s8ct2      30.45    31.74    8    31.72    8    30.45       8     30.52    32.36     60    31.82      98    30.52      57
             tc2c80s12cf3     30.60    31.97    9    31.28    8    30.60       8     30.60    32.70     76    31.37     105    30.60      57
             tc2c80s12cf4     42.10    43.89    9    43.69    9    42.10       9     42.14    44.97    131    43.81      86    42.14      83
             tc2c80s12ct3     29.90    30.83    9    30.31    8    29.90       8     29.90    31.59     58    30.39     114    29.90      54
             tc2c80s12ct4     40.27    42.40    9    42.56    9    40.27       9     40.27    42.82    134    44.68    103     40.27      74
             tc2c80s8cf3      31.70    32.44    9    31.94    8    31.70       8     31.93    32.60     64    32.06      87    31.93      55
             tc2c80s8cf4      46.03    49.29   10    49.67   10    46.03       9     46.78    49.69    100    49.84    128     46.78      93
             tc2c80s8ct3      31.38    32.31    9    32.71    9    31.38       8     31.43    32.55     65    32.82      89    31.43      65
             tc2c80s8ct4      43.83    44.83   10    44.16   10    43.83       9     44.00    46.61    111    44.31    103     44.00      75
             tc0c160s16cf2    57.91    61.20   16    62.09   15    57.91       15    58.00    62.99    365    62.55    442     58.00     242
             tc0c160s16cf4    76.90    82.92   18    82.77   18    76.90       16    77.55    83.84   1213    83.41     709    77.55     367
             tc0c160s16ct2    57.64    59.90   15    59.75   15    57.64       15    57.73    62.80    342    60.29    811     57.73     247
             tc0c160s16ct4    76.14    82.37   18    82.90   18    76.14       16    76.90    83.08    945    83.85    983     76.90     353
             tc0c160s24cf2    56.32    59.27   15    59.26   15    56.32       14    56.76    60.92    403    59.79    732     56.76     253
             tc0c160s24cf4    75.53    81.44   18    81.43   18    75.53       16    76.30    82.13   1209    82.33     595    76.30     370
             tc0c160s24ct2    55.42    59.25   16    59.67   16    55.42       14    56.47    60.19    410    60.21    915     56.47     253
             tc0c160s24ct4    75.05    80.96   18    81.38   18    75.05       16    75.87    82.11    957    82.21    436     75.87     372
             tc1c160s16cf0    74.54    79.80   18    79.76   18    74.54       16    75.32    80.75    766    80.52    420     75.32     327
             tc1c160s16cf3    66.45    71.76   17    71.98   17    66.45       15    67.20    72.75    462    72.77    729     67.20     307
             tc1c160s16ct0    74.20    79.04   17    80.21   17    74.20       16    75.31    79.90    643    80.99    472     75.31     326
             tc1c160s16ct3    65.31    73.29   17    73.24   17    65.31       15    66.20    75.11    279    73.82    750     66.20     289
             tc1c160s24cf0    73.62    78.60   17    79.48   17    73.62       16    74.05    79.30    741    80.32    460     74.05     331
             tc1c160s24cf3    62.90    68.56   17    68.73   17    62.90       15    63.64    69.57    483    69.28    522     63.64     282
             tc1c160s24ct0    73.34    78.21   17    78.32   17    73.34       16    74.00    79.35    578    79.05    553     74.00     319
             tc1c160s24ct3    63.19    68.72   17    69.17   17    63.19       15    63.66    69.98    358    69.76    889     63.66     280
             tc2c160s16cf1    56.65    60.34   16    60.25   15    56.65       14    57.39    61.26    274    60.70    716     57.39     252
             tc2c160s16ct1    55.37    60.27   15    59.86   15    55.37       14    55.52    60.62    288    60.40    408     55.52     232
             tc2c160s24cf1    56.70    59.82   16    60.01   16    56.70       14    57.27    61.14    305    60.63    564     57.27     260
             tc2c160s24ct1    55.03    59.13   16    59.97   15    55.03       14    55.15    59.72    340    60.53    531     55.15     238
             tc1c320s24cf2   133.32   152.13   36   153.12   36   133.32       31   133.99   153.99   7106   154.65    4155   133.99    1287
             tc1c320s24cf3   106.43   117.48   30   117.39   30   106.43       28   107.00   118.36   3066   118.43    3258   107.00    1060
             tc1c320s24ct2   131.63   148.77   36   148.57   36   131.63       30   132.49   154.13   6853   149.89    4727   132.49    1231
             tc1c320s24ct3   105.93   116.64   31   117.50   31   105.93       27   106.67   119.17   3274   118.53    5105   106.67    1045
             tc1c320s38cf2   129.19   141.63   33   142.25   33   129.19       30   129.76   147.08   7236   144.17    4249   129.76    1178
             tc1c320s38cf3   106.01   116.22   30   117.31   30   106.01       28   106.36   117.74   3114   118.78    5978   106.36    1129
             tc1c320s38ct2   128.82   140.96   32   142.75   32   128.82       30   129.51   145.09   6974   144.50    6078   129.51    1167
             tc1c320s38ct3   105.73   116.07   30   117.91   30   105.73       27   106.74   117.71   3063   119.40    3157   106.74    1186
             tc2c320s24cf0   158.80   182.45   38   182.90   38   158.80       33   160.55   186.94   6566   185.27    4014   160.55    1343
             tc2c320s24cf1    87.46    95.51   29    95.71   29    87.46       26    87.64    96.42   1456    96.81    5150    87.64     890
             tc2c320s24cf4   111.16   122.74   32   122.83   32   111.16       28   111.62   124.68   3681   124.51    3923   111.62     989
             tc2c320s24ct0   159.70   181.45   37   182.29   37   159.70       33   160.49   186.23   7204   183.80    6191   160.49    1309
             tc2c320s24ct1    87.25    94.73   27    94.97   27    87.25       26    87.83    96.49   1259    95.96    3530    87.83     863
             tc2c320s24ct4   111.09   121.94   32   122.09   32   111.09       28   111.62   123.85   4274   123.45    5196   111.62    1041
             tc2c320s38cf0   158.70   176.92   37   178.17   37   158.70       33   159.53   182.31   6734   179.81    3350   159.53    1356
             tc2c320s38cf1    86.92    94.29   28    95.73   28    86.92       26    87.25    95.07   1602    96.79    5343    87.25     890
             tc2c320s38cf4   109.80   122.32   32   122.26   32   109.80       28   110.66   123.47   2661   123.46    3724   110.66    1087
             tc2c320s38ct0   158.71   190.97   41   192.23   41   158.71       33   159.35   192.15   7637   194.66    4448   159.35    1374
             tc2c320s38ct1    86.59    94.53   28    94.66   28    86.59       26    86.97    95.29   1409    95.87    3973    86.97     894
             tc2c320s38ct4   110.05   121.66   32   121.64   32   110.05       28   110.55   123.15   2785   123.06    5554   110.55    1034




                                                                          36
Table 15: Detailed comparison of the best results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according
to the version of the subproblem it uses if the number of chargers at every CS is equal to 1 (instances with 10,
20, or 40 customers).


                            Version N                   Version D                   Version DW                  Version DWR
       Instance                                                                                                                         BS     BA
                     Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F     Best    Avg
       tc0c10s2cf1      5   10   19.75   19.75      5   10   19.75   19.75      6   10   19.75   19.75      5    10   19.75   19.75   19.75   19.75
       tc0c10s2ct1      4   10   12.30   12.30      4   10   12.30   12.30      4   10   12.30   12.30      4    10   12.30   12.30   12.30   12.30
       tc0c10s3cf1      5   10   19.75   19.75      6   10   19.75   19.75      6   10   19.75   19.75      6    10   19.75   19.75   19.75   19.75
       tc0c10s3ct1      5   10   10.80   10.80      5   10   10.80   10.80      5   10   10.80   10.80      5    10   10.80   10.80   10.80   10.80
       tc1c10s2cf2      5   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      6   10    9.03    9.03      5    10    9.03    9.03    9.03    9.03
       tc1c10s2cf3      6   10   16.37   16.37      6   10   16.37   16.37      6   10   16.37   16.37      6    10   16.37   16.37   16.37   16.37
       tc1c10s2cf4      5   10   16.10   16.10      6   10   16.10   16.10      5   10   16.10   16.10      6    10   16.10   16.10   16.10   16.10
       tc1c10s2ct2      4   10   10.75   10.75      4   10   10.75   10.75      4   10   10.75   10.75      4    10   10.75   10.75   10.75   10.75
       tc1c10s2ct3      5   10   13.25   13.25      5   10   13.17   13.17      5   10   13.17   13.17      5    10   13.17   13.17   13.17   13.17
       tc1c10s2ct4      5   10   13.83   13.83      5   10   13.83   13.83      5   10   13.83   13.83      5    10   13.83   13.83   13.83   13.83
       tc1c10s3cf2      4   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      5    10    9.03    9.03    9.03    9.03
       tc1c10s3cf3      4   10   16.37   16.37      4   10   16.37   16.37      4   10   16.37   16.37      4    10   16.37   16.37   16.37   16.37
       tc1c10s3cf4      3   10   14.90   14.90      4   10   14.90   14.90      4   10   14.90   14.90      4    10   14.90   14.90   14.90   14.90
       tc1c10s3ct2      7   10    9.20    9.20      7   10    9.20    9.20      7   10    9.20    9.20      7    10    9.20    9.20    9.20    9.20
       tc1c10s3ct3      5   10   13.02   13.02      6   10   13.02   13.02      6   10   13.02   13.02      6    10   13.02   13.02   13.02   13.02
       tc1c10s3ct4      5   10   13.21   13.21      6   10   13.21   13.21      6   10   13.21   13.21      5    10   13.21   13.21   13.21   13.21
       tc2c10s2cf0      5   10   21.83   21.83      5   10   21.77   21.77      6   10   21.77   21.77      6    10   21.77   21.77   21.77   21.77
       tc2c10s2ct0      5   10   12.45   12.45      5   10   12.45   12.45      4   10   12.45   12.45      5    10   12.45   12.45   12.45   12.45
       tc2c10s3cf0      4   10   21.83   21.83      4   10   21.77   21.77      4   10   21.77   21.77      4    10   21.77   21.77   21.77   21.77
       tc2c10s3ct0      6   10   11.51   11.51      6   10   11.51   11.51      6   10   11.51   11.51      6    10   11.51   11.51   11.51   11.51
       tc0c20s3cf2     12   10   27.62   27.62     12   10   27.47   27.47     11   10   27.47   27.47     12    10   27.47   27.47   27.47   27.47
       tc0c20s3ct2      8   10   17.08   17.08      8   10   17.08   17.08      7   10   17.08   17.08      8    10   17.08   17.08   17.08   17.08
       tc0c20s4cf2     10   10   27.62   27.62     10   10   27.47   27.47     10   10   27.47   27.47      9    10   27.47   27.47   27.47   27.47
       tc0c20s4ct2     10   10   16.99   16.99     10   10   16.99   16.99     10   10   16.99   16.99     11    10   16.99   16.99   16.99   16.99
       tc1c20s3cf1     12   10   17.49   17.49     12   10   17.49   17.49     13   10   17.49   17.49     12    10   17.49   17.49   17.49   17.49
       tc1c20s3cf3      9   10   16.44   16.44      9   10   16.44   16.44      9   10   16.44   16.44     10    10   16.44   16.44   16.44   16.44
       tc1c20s3cf4      6   10   17.00   17.00      7   10   17.00   17.00      6   10   17.00   17.00      6    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
       tc1c20s3ct1     11   10   18.94   18.94     10   10   18.94   18.94     11   10   18.94   18.94     11    10   18.94   18.94   18.94   18.94
       tc1c20s3ct3     11   10   12.60   12.60     11   10   12.60   12.60     11   10   12.60   12.60     11    10   12.60   12.60   12.60   12.60
       tc1c20s3ct4      9   10   16.21   16.21     10   10   16.21   16.21      9   10   16.21   16.21      9    10   16.21   16.21   16.21   16.21
       tc1c20s4cf1      8   10   16.38   16.38      8   10   16.38   16.38      8   10   16.38   16.38      8    10   16.38   16.38   16.38   16.38
       tc1c20s4cf3     13   10   16.44   16.44     12   10   16.44   16.44     12   10   16.44   16.44     13    10   16.44   16.44   16.44   16.44
       tc1c20s4cf4     10   10   17.00   17.00     10   10   17.00   17.00      9   10   17.00   17.00     10    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
       tc1c20s4ct1     12   10   17.80   17.80     13   10   17.80   17.80     12   10   17.80   17.80     12    10   17.80   17.80   17.80   17.80
       tc1c20s4ct3      7   10   14.43   14.43      7   10   14.43   14.43      7   10   14.43   14.43      8    10   14.43   14.43   14.43   14.43
       tc1c20s4ct4      8   10   17.00   17.00      8   10   17.00   17.00      8   10   17.00   17.00      8    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
       tc2c20s3cf0      9   10   24.68   24.68      9   10   24.68   24.68      8   10   24.68   24.68      9    10   24.68   24.68   24.68   24.68
       tc2c20s3ct0     12   10   25.80   25.80     12   10   25.79   25.79     12   10   25.79   25.79     12    10   25.79   25.79   25.79   25.79
       tc2c20s4cf0     12   10   24.68   24.68     12   10   24.67   24.67     12   10   24.67   24.67     12    10   24.67   24.67   24.67   24.67
       tc2c20s4ct0     11   10   26.17   26.18     11   10   26.02   26.02     12   10   26.02   26.02     12    10   26.02   26.02   26.02   26.02
       tc0c40s5cf0     21   10   32.20   32.23     20   10   32.20   32.23     20   10   32.20   32.23     20    10   32.20   32.23   32.20   32.23
       tc0c40s5cf4     26   10   30.25   30.25     25   10   30.25   30.25     25   10   30.25   30.25     26    10   30.25   30.25   30.25   30.25
       tc0c40s5ct0     20   10   27.91   27.91     20   10   27.91   27.91     21   10   27.91   27.91     21    10   27.91   27.91   27.91   27.91
       tc0c40s5ct4     23   10   28.63   28.63     23   10   28.63   28.63     22   10   28.63   28.63     22    10   28.63   28.63   28.63   28.63
       tc0c40s8cf0     22   10   30.46   30.51     21   10   30.40   30.40     21   10   30.40   30.40     21    10   30.40   30.40   30.40   30.40
       tc0c40s8cf4     28   10   28.24   28.25     29   10   28.24   28.25     29   10   28.24   28.25     28    10   28.24   28.25   28.24   28.25
       tc0c40s8ct0     20   10   26.22   26.22     20   10   26.22   26.22     20   10   26.22   26.22     20    10   26.22   26.22   26.22   26.22
       tc0c40s8ct4     27   10   29.07   29.07     26   10   29.07   29.07     26   10   29.07   29.07     27    10   29.07   29.07   29.07   29.07
       tc1c40s5cf1     27    0       -       -     14    0       -       -     14    0       -       -   1299     0       -       -       -       -
       tc1c40s5ct1     26   10   52.42   52.70     28   10   52.42   52.60     26   10   52.42   52.60     27    10   52.33   52.33   52.33   52.33
       tc1c40s8cf1     25   10   41.67   42.21     24   10   40.64   40.64     23   10   40.64   40.64     24    10   40.64   40.64   40.64   40.64
       tc1c40s8ct1     29   10   40.45   40.73     28   10   40.35   40.36     28   10   40.35   40.36     29    10   40.35   40.35   40.35   40.35
       tc2c40s5cf2     20   10   27.54   27.54     19   10   27.54   27.54     20   10   27.54   27.54     21    10   27.54   27.54   27.54   27.54
       tc2c40s5cf3     26   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     26    10   19.65   19.65   19.65   19.65
       tc2c40s5ct2     20   10   26.91   26.91     19   10   26.91   26.91     19   10   26.91   26.91     19    10   26.91   26.91   26.91   26.91
       tc2c40s5ct3     23   10   23.39   23.39     22   10   23.39   23.39     22   10   23.39   23.39     21    10   23.39   23.39   23.39   23.39
       tc2c40s8cf2     20   10   27.13   27.13     20   10   27.13   27.13     20   10   27.13   27.13     20    10   27.13   27.13   27.13   27.13
       tc2c40s8cf3     26   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     26   10   19.65   19.65     24    10   19.65   19.65   19.65   19.65
       tc2c40s8ct2     19   10   26.28   26.28     19   10   26.28   26.28     18   10   26.28   26.28     18    10   26.28   26.28   26.28   26.28
       tc2c40s8ct3     27   10   22.45   22.45     28   10   22.45   22.45     28   10   22.45   22.45     28    10   22.45   22.45   22.45   22.45




                                                                         37
Table 16: Detailed comparison of the best results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according
to the version of the subproblem it uses if the number of charger at every CS is equal to 1(instances with 80,
160, or 320 customers).

                        Version N                     Version D                    Version DW                    Version DWR
Instance                                                                                                                                   BS      BA
                Time   #F     Best     Avg    Time   #F    Best      Avg    Time   #F     Best     Avg    Time   #F     Best     Avg
tc0c80s12cf0      74   10    34.06    34.20     75   10   34.06     34.20     78   10    34.06    34.20     77   10    34.06    34.20    34.06    34.20
tc0c80s12cf1      78   10    40.83    40.95     77   10   40.83     40.94     77   10    40.83    40.94     77   10    40.83    40.94    40.83    40.94
tc0c80s12ct0      76   10    37.51    37.95     77   10   37.51     37.89     77   10    37.51    37.89     77   10    37.51    37.98    37.51    37.89
tc0c80s12ct1      72   10    39.72    40.01     73   10   39.72     40.00     71   10    39.72    40.00     72   10    39.72    40.00    39.72    40.00
tc0c80s8cf0       61   10    38.59    38.79     61   10   38.59     38.79     62   10    38.59    38.79     60   10    38.59    38.79    38.59    38.79
tc0c80s8cf1       83   10    43.41    44.28     80   10   43.38     44.05     81   10    43.38    44.05     85   10    43.38    44.13    43.38    44.05
tc0c80s8ct0       71   10    40.53    41.47     71   10   40.53     41.47     69   10    40.53    41.47     69   10    40.53    41.47    40.53    41.47
tc0c80s8ct1       82   10    43.86    43.99     82   10   43.85     43.98     80   10    43.85    43.98     82   10    43.85    43.98    43.85    43.98
tc1c80s12cf2      58   10    28.65    28.77     59   10   28.65     28.77     58   10    28.65    28.77     59   10    28.65    28.77    28.65    28.77
tc1c80s12ct2      60   10    28.73    29.17     60   10   28.73     29.09     59   10    28.73    29.09     62   10    28.73    29.14    28.73    29.09
tc1c80s8cf2       63   10    29.15    29.15     62   10   29.15     29.15     60   10    29.15    29.15     62   10    29.15    29.15    29.15    29.15
tc1c80s8ct2       61   10    29.88    30.42     63   10   29.88     30.42     62   10    29.88    30.42     63   10    29.88    30.42    29.88    30.42
tc2c80s12cf3      63   10    30.61    30.61     62   10   30.60     30.60     63   10    30.60    30.60     62   10    30.60    30.60    30.60    30.60
tc2c80s12cf4      89   10    42.20    42.62     88   10   42.12     42.25     89   10    42.12    42.25    105   10    42.12    42.26    42.12    42.25
tc2c80s12ct3      62   10    29.90    29.90     61   10   29.90     29.90     62   10    29.90    29.90     61   10    29.90    29.90    29.90    29.90
tc2c80s12ct4      87   10    40.28    40.28     86   10   40.27     40.27     85   10    40.27    40.27     86   10    40.27    40.27    40.27    40.27
tc2c80s8cf3       61   10    31.70    31.93     60   10   31.70     31.93     61   10    31.70    31.93     60   10    31.70    31.93    31.70    31.93
tc2c80s8cf4      100   10    46.19    46.85    102   10   46.19     46.84    104   10    46.19    46.84    102   10    46.19    46.94    46.19    46.84
tc2c80s8ct3       75   10    31.38    31.38     76   10   31.38     31.38     76   10    31.38    31.38     74   10    31.38    31.38    31.38    31.38
tc2c80s8ct4       85   10    43.98    44.03     86   10   43.98     44.02     84   10    43.98    44.02     88   10    43.98    44.02    43.98    44.02
tc0c160s16cf2    285   10    57.93    58.04    272   10   57.91     58.02    273   10    57.91    58.02    268   10    57.91    58.01    57.91    58.01
tc0c160s16cf4    428   10    77.56    78.47    429   10   77.30     77.63    425   10    77.30    77.63    862   10    77.30    77.67    77.30    77.63
tc0c160s16ct2    286   10    57.16    57.63    288   10   57.16     57.64    289   10    57.16    57.64    279   10    57.16    57.64    57.16    57.63
tc0c160s16ct4    417   10    76.18    77.25    404   10    76.30    76.97    414   10    76.30    76.98    798   10    76.18    76.97    76.18    76.97
tc0c160s24cf2    291   10    56.86    56.93    284   10   56.86     56.94    285   10    56.86    56.94    286   10    56.86    56.93    56.86    56.93
tc0c160s24cf4    430   10    76.21    77.04    429   10   75.63     76.60    432   10    75.63    76.55    538   10    75.83    76.67    75.63    76.55
tc0c160s24ct2    298   10    55.53    56.30    303   10   55.42     56.23    301   10    55.42    56.23    294   10    55.42    56.17    55.42    56.17
tc0c160s24ct4    420   10    75.13    76.34    432   10   75.09     76.26    430   10    75.09    76.26    577   10    75.36    76.29    75.09    76.26
tc1c160s16cf0    382    8    75.81    77.16    372   10    74.69    76.53    379   10    74.69    76.53    413   10    74.64    75.83    74.64    75.83
tc1c160s16cf3    348   10    66.52    67.80    347   10    66.52    67.17    352   10    66.52    67.18    352   10    66.49    67.26    66.49    67.17
tc1c160s16ct0    369   10    74.30    74.94    367   10    74.24    74.91    360   10    74.24    74.91    382   10    74.20    74.62    74.20    74.62
tc1c160s16ct3    323   10    65.45    66.40    316   10    65.24    66.02    318   10    65.24    66.02    313   10    65.23    66.08    65.23    66.02
tc1c160s24cf0    381   10    73.93    74.60    372   10   73.62     73.96    374   10    73.62    73.90    445   10    73.62    74.03    73.62    73.90
tc1c160s24cf3    328   10    63.22    63.93    323   10    63.06    63.60    331   10    63.06    63.60    331   10    63.05    63.78    63.05    63.60
tc1c160s24ct0    384   10    73.95    74.61    380   10   73.32     73.95    371   10    73.32    73.95    375   10    73.32    73.77    73.32    73.77
tc1c160s24ct3    335   10    62.76    63.22    334   10   62.70     63.30    335   10    62.70    63.30    328   10    62.70    63.26    62.70    63.22
tc2c160s16cf1    284   10    56.71    57.44    286   10   56.59     57.33    285   10    56.59    57.33    284   10    56.66    57.38    56.59    57.33
tc2c160s16ct1    257   10    55.37    55.45    257   10   55.37     55.43    255   10    55.37    55.43    261   10    55.37    55.44    55.37    55.43
tc2c160s24cf1    289   10    56.00    57.24    298   10    56.47    57.20    299   10    56.47    04:48    297   10    56.47    57.36    56.00    57.20
tc2c160s24ct1    276   10    55.03    55.07    286   10   54.96     55.10    281   10    54.96    55.10    270   10    55.03    55.15    54.96    55.07
tc1c320s24cf2   1600    0        -        -   1582   10   133.89   135.14   1570   10   133.91   135.16   3219   10   133.66   135.37   133.66   135.14
tc1c320s24cf3   1250   10   105.88   106.73   1252   10   105.70   106.70   1268   10   105.70   106.70   1262   10   105.47   106.77   105.47   106.70
tc1c320s24ct2   1480    0        -        -   2337   10   133.46   135.57   2366   10   133.46   135.23   3461    9   132.50   134.69   132.50   134.69
tc1c320s24ct3   1166   10   105.40   106.31   1162   10   105.68   106.29   1156   10   105.68   106.29   1186   10   105.89   106.47   105.40   106.29
tc1c320s38cf2   1417    0        -        -   1370   10   129.09   129.61   1375   10   129.09   129.68   1561   10   128.96   129.40   128.96   129.40
tc1c320s38cf3   1286   10   105.60   106.21   1276   10   105.71   106.47   1265   10   105.71   106.47   1232   10   105.41   106.23   105.41   106.21
tc1c320s38ct2   1422    0        -        -   1397   10   128.86   129.80   1399   10   128.86   129.79   2603   10   128.69   129.65   128.69   129.65
tc1c320s38ct3   1342   10   106.42   106.82   1356   10   105.93   106.60   1377   10   105.93   106.60   1395   10   105.44   106.66   105.44   106.60
tc2c320s24cf0   1840    0        -        -   2534   10   163.39   165.89   2587   10   163.39   165.94   3472   10   162.15   165.15   162.15   165.15
tc2c320s24cf1   1014   10    87.19    87.59   1004   10    87.27    87.65   1021   10    87.27    87.65   1028   10    87.26    87.68    87.19    87.59
tc2c320s24cf4   1113    4   112.46   114.09   1095   10   111.74   112.45   1083   10   111.74   112.39   1433   10   111.59   112.19   111.59   112.19
tc2c320s24ct0   1683    0        -        -   2482   10   164.81   166.51   2498   10   164.81   166.46   3413   10   164.18   166.59   164.18   166.46
tc2c320s24ct1   1016   10    86.86    87.57   1026   10    87.26    87.64   1043   10    87.26    87.64   1017   10    87.01    87.51    86.86    87.51
tc2c320s24ct4   1214    5   111.66   113.18   1191   10   111.00   111.90   1182   10   111.00   111.76   1231   10   110.95   111.82   110.95   111.76
tc2c320s38cf0   1697    0        -        -   1875   10   160.69   162.51   1886   10   160.69   162.51   3388   10   160.59   161.69   160.59   161.69
tc2c320s38cf1   1016   10    86.65    87.17   1013   10    86.97    87.25   1029   10    86.97    87.25    999   10    86.69    87.21    86.65    87.17
tc2c320s38cf4   1274   10   109.48   110.62   1226   10   110.19   110.63   1224   10   110.19   110.63   1253   10   109.91   110.46   109.48   110.46
tc2c320s38ct0   1825    0        -        -   2169   10   160.54   162.97   2166   10   160.36   162.94   3252   10   161.25   162.34   160.36   162.34
tc2c320s38ct1   1076   10    86.59    86.97   1075   10   86.23     86.72   1068   10    86.23    86.72   1061   10    86.53    86.88    86.23    86.72
tc2c320s38ct4   1182   10   109.97   110.73   1201   10   109.60   110.29   1189   10   109.60   110.29   1210   10   109.44   110.27   109.44   110.27




                                                                            38
Table 17: Detailed comparison of the best results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according
to the version of the subproblem it uses if the number of chargers at every CS is equal to 2 (instances with 10,
20, or 40 customers).

                     Version N                   Version D                   Version DW                  Version DWR
Instance                                                                                                                         BS     BA
              Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F    Best    Avg    Time   #F     Best    Avg
tc0c10s2cf1      6   10   19.75   19.75      6   10   19.75   19.75      5   10   19.75   19.75      5    10   19.75   19.75   19.75   19.75
tc0c10s2ct1      4   10   12.30   12.30      4   10   12.30   12.30      4   10   12.30   12.30      4    10   12.30   12.30   12.30   12.30
tc0c10s3cf1      6   10   19.75   19.75      5   10   19.75   19.75      6   10   19.75   19.75      6    10   19.75   19.75   19.75   19.75
tc0c10s3ct1      5   10   10.80   10.80      5   10   10.80   10.80      5   10   10.80   10.80      5    10   10.80   10.80   10.80   10.80
tc1c10s2cf2      6   10    9.03    9.03      6   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      6    10    9.03    9.03    9.03    9.03
tc1c10s2cf3      6   10   16.37   16.37      6   10   16.37   16.37      6   10   16.37   16.37      6    10   16.37   16.37   16.37   16.37
tc1c10s2cf4      6   10   16.10   16.10      5   10   16.10   16.10      5   10   16.10   16.10      6    10   16.10   16.10   16.10   16.10
tc1c10s2ct2      4   10   10.75   10.75      4   10   10.75   10.75      4   10   10.75   10.75      4    10   10.75   10.75   10.75   10.75
tc1c10s2ct3      5   10   13.17   13.17      5   10   13.17   13.17      5   10   13.17   13.17      5    10   13.17   13.17   13.17   13.17
tc1c10s2ct4      5   10   13.83   13.83      5   10   13.83   13.83      5   10   13.83   13.83      5    10   13.83   13.83   13.83   13.83
tc1c10s3cf2      5   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      5   10    9.03    9.03      5    10    9.03    9.03    9.03    9.03
tc1c10s3cf3      4   10   16.37   16.37      4   10   16.37   16.37      4   10   16.37   16.37      4    10   16.37   16.37   16.37   16.37
tc1c10s3cf4      3   10   14.90   14.90      4   10   14.90   14.90      3   10   14.90   14.90      3    10   14.90   14.90   14.90   14.90
tc1c10s3ct2      6   10    9.20    9.20      7   10    9.20    9.20      7   10    9.20    9.20      6    10    9.20    9.20    9.20    9.20
tc1c10s3ct3      6   10   13.02   13.02      5   10   13.02   13.02      5   10   13.02   13.02      5    10   13.02   13.02   13.02   13.02
tc1c10s3ct4      5   10   13.21   13.21      6   10   13.21   13.21      5   10   13.21   13.21      5    10   13.21   13.21   13.21   13.21
tc2c10s2cf0      6   10   21.77   21.77      6   10   21.77   21.77      6   10   21.77   21.77      6    10   21.77   21.77   21.77   21.77
tc2c10s2ct0      5   10   12.45   12.45      5   10   12.45   12.45      5   10   12.45   12.45      5    10   12.45   12.45   12.45   12.45
tc2c10s3cf0      4   10   21.77   21.77      4   10   21.77   21.77      4   10   21.77   21.77      4    10   21.77   21.77   21.77   21.77
tc2c10s3ct0      6   10   11.51   11.51      6   10   11.51   11.51      7   10   11.51   11.51      6    10   11.51   11.51   11.51   11.51
tc0c20s3cf2     11   10   27.47   27.47     11   10   27.47   27.47     12   10   27.47   27.47     12    10   27.47   27.47   27.47   27.47
tc0c20s3ct2      8   10   17.08   17.08      8   10   17.08   17.08      8   10   17.08   17.08      7    10   17.08   17.08   17.08   17.08
tc0c20s4cf2      9   10   27.47   27.47     10   10   27.47   27.47     10   10   27.47   27.47      9    10   27.47   27.47   27.47   27.47
tc0c20s4ct2     11   10   16.99   16.99     11   10   16.99   16.99     11   10   16.99   16.99     10    10   16.99   16.99   16.99   16.99
tc1c20s3cf1     12   10   17.49   17.49     12   10   17.49   17.49     12   10   17.49   17.49     12    10   17.49   17.49   17.49   17.49
tc1c20s3cf3     10   10   16.44   16.44      9   10   16.44   16.44      9   10   16.44   16.44      9    10   16.44   16.44   16.44   16.44
tc1c20s3cf4      7   10   17.00   17.00      7   10   17.00   17.00      6   10   17.00   17.00      7    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
tc1c20s3ct1     11   10   18.94   18.94     11   10   18.94   18.94     11   10   18.94   18.94     10    10   18.94   18.94   18.94   18.94
tc1c20s3ct3     11   10   12.60   12.60     11   10   12.60   12.60     10   10   12.60   12.60     10    10   12.60   12.60   12.60   12.60
tc1c20s3ct4      9   10   16.21   16.21      9   10   16.21   16.21     10   10   16.21   16.21     10    10   16.21   16.21   16.21   16.21
tc1c20s4cf1      9   10   16.38   16.38      8   10   16.38   16.38      8   10   16.38   16.38      8    10   16.38   16.38   16.38   16.38
tc1c20s4cf3     13   10   16.44   16.44     13   10   16.44   16.44     13   10   16.44   16.44     13    10   16.44   16.44   16.44   16.44
tc1c20s4cf4     10   10   17.00   17.00      9   10   17.00   17.00     10   10   17.00   17.00      9    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
tc1c20s4ct1     12   10   17.80   17.80     13   10   17.80   17.80     13   10   17.80   17.80     13    10   17.80   17.80   17.80   17.80
tc1c20s4ct3      7   10   14.43   14.43      8   10   14.43   14.43      7   10   14.43   14.43      8    10   14.43   14.43   14.43   14.43
tc1c20s4ct4      8   10   17.00   17.00      8   10   17.00   17.00      8   10   17.00   17.00      8    10   17.00   17.00   17.00   17.00
tc2c20s3cf0      9   10   24.68   24.68      9   10   24.68   24.68      8   10   24.68   24.68      8    10   24.68   24.68   24.68   24.68
tc2c20s3ct0     12   10   25.79   25.79     12   10   25.79   25.79     12   10   25.79   25.79     11    10   25.79   25.79   25.79   25.79
tc2c20s4cf0     12   10   24.67   24.67     12   10   24.67   24.67     11   10   24.67   24.67     11    10   24.67   24.67   24.67   24.67
tc2c20s4ct0     12   10   26.02   26.02     12   10   26.02   26.02     11   10   26.02   26.02     11    10   26.02   26.02   26.02   26.02
tc0c40s5cf0     20   10   32.20   32.23     20   10   32.20   32.23     21   10   32.20   32.23     20    10   32.20   32.23   32.20   32.23
tc0c40s5cf4     26   10   30.25   30.25     26   10   30.25   30.25     25   10   30.25   30.25     26    10   30.25   30.25   30.25   30.25
tc0c40s5ct0     20   10   27.91   27.91     20   10   27.91   27.91     19   10   27.91   27.91     19    10   27.91   27.91   27.91   27.91
tc0c40s5ct4     23   10   28.63   28.63     23   10   28.63   28.63     23   10   28.63   28.63     22    10   28.63   28.63   28.63   28.63
tc0c40s8cf0     20   10   30.40   30.40     21   10   30.40   30.40     21   10   30.40   30.40     20    10   30.40   30.40   30.40   30.40
tc0c40s8cf4     28   10   28.24   28.25     28   10   28.24   28.25     29   10   28.24   28.25     29    10   28.24   28.25   28.24   28.25
tc0c40s8ct0     21   10   26.22   26.22     20   10   26.22   26.22     20   10   26.22   26.22     21    10   26.22   26.22   26.22   26.22
tc0c40s8ct4     26   10   29.07   29.07     26   10   29.07   29.07     26   10   29.07   29.07     26    10   29.07   29.07   29.07   29.07
tc1c40s5cf1     28    2   66.55   66.55     28   10   65.38   67.50     28   10   65.38   67.50    454    10   65.38   66.51   65.38   66.51
tc1c40s5ct1     27   10   52.33   52.33     27   10   52.33   52.33     26   10   52.33   52.33     26    10   52.33   52.33   52.33   52.33
tc1c40s8cf1     23   10   40.64   40.64     24   10   40.64   40.64     24   10   40.64   40.64     23    10   40.64   40.64   40.64   40.64
tc1c40s8ct1     28   10   40.18   40.18     27   10   40.18   40.18     27   10   40.18   40.18     28    10   40.18   40.18   40.18   40.18
tc2c40s5cf2     19   10   27.54   27.54     19   10   27.54   27.54     20   10   27.54   27.54     20    10   27.54   27.54   27.54   27.54
tc2c40s5cf3     25   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     26    10   19.65   19.65   19.65   19.65
tc2c40s5ct2     18   10   26.91   26.91     19   10   26.91   26.91     19   10   26.91   26.91     19    10   26.91   26.91   26.91   26.91
tc2c40s5ct3     22   10   23.39   23.39     22   10   23.39   23.39     23   10   23.39   23.39     22    10   23.39   23.39   23.39   23.39
tc2c40s8cf2     20   10   27.13   27.13     20   10   27.13   27.13     20   10   27.13   27.13     19    10   27.13   27.13   27.13   27.13
tc2c40s8cf3     25   10   19.65   19.65     26   10   19.65   19.65     25   10   19.65   19.65     25    10   19.65   19.65   19.65   19.65
tc2c40s8ct2     19   10   26.28   26.28     19   10   26.28   26.28     18   10   26.28   26.28     19    10   26.28   26.28   26.28   26.28
tc2c40s8ct3     29   10   22.45   22.45     28   10   22.45   22.45     29   10   22.45   22.45     29    10   22.45   22.45   22.45   22.45




                                                                             39
Table 18: Detailed comparison of the best results obtained by the matheuristic for the E-VRP-NL-C according
to the version of the subproblem it uses if the number of chargers at every CS is equal to 2 (instances with 80,
160, or 320 customers).

                        Version N                     Version D                    Version DW                    Version DWR
Instance                                                                                                                                   BS      BA
                Time   #F     Best     Avg    Time   #F     Best     Avg    Time   #F     Best     Avg    Time   #F     Best     Avg
tc0c80s12cf0      76   10    34.06    34.20     74   10    34.06    34.20     75   10    34.06    34.20     77   10    34.06    34.20    34.06    34.20
tc0c80s12cf1      77   10    40.83    40.94     77   10    40.83    40.94     77   10    40.83    40.94     76   10    40.83    40.94    40.83    40.94
tc0c80s12ct0      75   10    37.51    37.95     76   10    37.51    37.89     74   10    37.51    37.89     75   10    37.51    37.98    37.51    37.89
tc0c80s12ct1      71   10    39.72    40.00     70   10    39.72    40.00     72   10    39.72    40.00     71   10    39.72    40.00    39.72    40.00
tc0c80s8cf0       61   10    38.59    38.84     62   10    38.59    38.84     62   10    38.59    38.84     61   10    38.59    38.84    38.59    38.84
tc0c80s8cf1       83   10    43.38    44.09     82   10    43.38    44.12     85   10    43.38    44.12     87   10    43.38    44.10    43.38    44.09
tc0c80s8ct0       67   10    40.53    41.47     69   10    40.53    41.47     70   10    40.53    41.47     71   10    40.53    41.47    40.53    41.47
tc0c80s8ct1       78   10    43.85    43.98     80   10    43.85    43.98     79   10    43.85    43.98     81   10    43.85    43.98    43.85    43.98
tc1c80s12cf2      59   10    28.65    28.77     57   10    28.65    28.77     60   10    28.65    28.77     59   10    28.65    28.77    28.65    28.77
tc1c80s12ct2      60   10    28.73    29.17     62   10    28.73    29.09     63   10    28.73    29.09     62   10    28.73    29.14    28.73    29.09
tc1c80s8cf2       62   10    29.15    29.15     63   10    29.15    29.15     62   10    29.15    29.15     62   10    29.15    29.15    29.15    29.15
tc1c80s8ct2       64   10    29.88    30.42     64   10    29.88    30.42     64   10    29.88    30.42     62   10    29.88    30.42    29.88    30.42
tc2c80s12cf3      63   10    30.60    30.60     62   10    30.60    30.60     61   10    30.60    30.60     62   10    30.60    30.60    30.60    30.60
tc2c80s12cf4      87   10    42.12    42.20     89   10    42.11    42.18     88   10    42.11    42.18     88   10    42.11    42.18    42.11    42.18
tc2c80s12ct3      63   10    29.90    29.90     64   10    29.90    29.90     64   10    29.90    29.90     62   10    29.90    29.90    29.90    29.90
tc2c80s12ct4      88   10    40.27    40.27     86   10    40.27    40.27     88   10    40.27    40.27     85   10    40.27    40.27    40.27    40.27
tc2c80s8cf3       59   10    31.70    31.93     60   10    31.70    31.93     59   10    31.70    31.93     59   10    31.70    31.93    31.70    31.93
tc2c80s8cf4      101   10    46.18    46.65    101   10    46.06    46.64    103   10    46.06    46.64    102   10    46.18    46.65    46.06    46.64
tc2c80s8ct3       75   10    31.38    31.38     78   10    31.38    31.38     76   10    31.38    31.38     76   10    31.38    31.38    31.38    31.38
tc2c80s8ct4       87   10    43.72    43.97     85   10    43.72    43.97     84   10    43.72    43.97     87   10    43.72    43.97    43.72    43.97
tc0c160s16cf2    277   10    57.91    58.01    279   10    57.91    58.01    276   10    57.91    58.01    279   10    57.91    58.01    57.91    58.01
tc0c160s16cf4    416   10    77.04    77.59    418   10    77.04    77.62    424   10    77.04    77.62    427   10    77.03    77.60    77.03    77.59
tc0c160s16ct2    286   10    57.16    57.63    280   10    57.16    57.63    285   10    57.16    57.63    286   10    57.16    57.64    57.16    57.63
tc0c160s16ct4    403   10    76.66    76.93    395   10    76.37    76.86    408   10    76.37    76.86    399   10    76.14    76.87    76.14    76.86
tc0c160s24cf2    284   10    56.86    56.93    283   10    56.86    56.92    283   10    56.86    56.92    285   10    56.86    56.92    56.86    56.92
tc0c160s24cf4    432   10    75.50    76.46    415   10    76.00    76.61    410   10    76.00    76.61    430   10    75.59    76.48    75.50    76.46
tc0c160s24ct2    289   10    55.43    56.18    291   10    55.42    56.16    302   10    55.42    56.16    296   10    55.42    56.17    55.42    56.16
tc0c160s24ct4    418   10    74.99    76.16    428   10    75.06    76.01    429   10    75.06    76.01    436   10    74.99    76.19    74.99    76.01
tc1c160s16cf0    365   10    74.55    75.63    370   10    74.55    75.51    368   10    74.55    75.51    374   10    74.55    75.51    74.55    75.51
tc1c160s16cf3    348   10    66.14    66.92    352   10    66.32    67.02    351   10    66.32    67.02    344   10    66.32    66.98    66.14    66.92
tc1c160s16ct0    372   10    74.19    74.70    372   10    74.20    75.16    368   10    74.20    75.16    379   10    74.19    74.66    74.19    74.66
tc1c160s16ct3    307   10    65.22    66.08    309   10    66.03    66.42    311   10    66.03    66.42    319   10    65.26    66.27    65.22    66.08
tc1c160s24cf0    377   10    73.67    74.05    367   10    73.62    73.85    371   10    73.62    73.85    372   10    73.62    74.06    73.62    73.85
tc1c160s24cf3    323   10    63.17    63.86    334   10    63.22    63.83    325   10    63.22    63.83    333   10    63.17    63.74    63.17    63.74
tc1c160s24ct0    371   10    73.34    73.81    367   10    73.32    73.81    361   10    73.32    73.81    366   10    73.34    74.12    73.32    73.81
tc1c160s24ct3    330   10    62.70    63.28    326   10    62.70    63.27    337   10    62.70    63.27    336   10    62.70    63.32    62.70    63.27
tc2c160s16cf1    285   10    57.04    57.65    279   10    57.01    57.62    284   10    57.01    57.62    280   10    57.04    57.65    57.01    57.62
tc2c160s16ct1    260   10    55.37    55.44    258   10    55.37    55.44    262   10    55.37    55.44    258   10    55.37    55.46    55.37    55.44
tc2c160s24cf1    298   10    56.00    57.27    300   10    56.47    57.18    294   10    56.47    57.18    288   10    56.67    57.38    56.00    57.18
tc2c160s24ct1    281   10    55.03    55.16    291   10    55.03    55.14    283   10    55.03    55.14    274   10    54.96    55.10    54.96    55.10
tc1c320s24cf2   1561   10   133.66   134.28   1464   10   132.45   133.57   1458   10   132.45   133.57   1461   10   132.82   133.75   132.45   133.57
tc1c320s24cf3   1237   10   105.29   106.53   1233   10   105.47   106.60   1224   10   105.47   106.60   1264   10   106.21   106.98   105.29   106.53
tc1c320s24ct2   1601   10   132.16   133.09   1380   10   131.73   132.30   1379   10   131.73   132.30   1386   10   131.69   132.28   131.69   132.28
tc1c320s24ct3   1199   10   105.92   106.40   1142   10   105.25   106.06   1150   10   105.25   106.06   1156   10   105.37   106.27   105.25   106.06
tc1c320s38cf2   1359   10   129.01   129.40   1360   10   128.87   129.21   1375   10   128.87   129.21   1371   10   128.87   129.28   128.87   129.21
tc1c320s38cf3   1231   10   105.55   106.24   1243   10   104.90   105.88   1227   10   104.90   105.88   1253   10   105.72   106.24   104.90   105.88
tc1c320s38ct2   1395   10   128.84   129.44   1366   10   128.71   129.43   1349   10   128.71   129.43   1418   10   128.79   129.34   128.71   129.34
tc1c320s38ct3   1350   10   105.83   106.50   1385   10   105.39   106.64   1379   10   105.39   106.64   1339   10   105.23   106.42   105.23   106.42
tc2c320s24cf0   1880   10   160.36   161.73   1539   10   159.66   160.55   1555   10   159.66   160.55   1703   10   158.96   160.60   158.96   160.55
tc2c320s24cf1   1012   10    87.26    87.73   1032   10    87.35    87.71   1047   10    87.35    87.71   1039   10    87.31    87.66    87.26    87.66
tc2c320s24cf4   1065   10   110.98   111.52   1088   10   110.58   111.12   1074   10   110.58   111.12   1085   10   110.73   111.37   110.58   111.12
tc2c320s24ct0   1826   10   160.19   161.36   1505   10   159.58   160.22   1485   10   159.58   160.30   2184   10   159.62   160.01   159.58   160.01
tc2c320s24ct1    996   10    87.26    87.68   1030   10    87.02    87.52   1024   10    87.02    87.52   1014   10    87.28    87.70    87.02    87.52
tc2c320s24ct4   1175   10   111.07   111.63   1177   10   111.04   111.54   1155   10   111.04   111.54   1171   10   110.99   111.63   110.99   111.54
tc2c320s38cf0   1571   10   159.35   159.93   1588   10   158.29   159.33   1580   10   158.29   159.33   1589   10   158.44   159.48   158.29   159.33
tc2c320s38cf1   1008   10    86.88    87.22   1024   10    86.78    87.19   1015   10    86.78    87.19   1021   10    86.77    87.30    86.77    87.19
tc2c320s38cf4   1264   10   109.93   110.56   1264   10   109.94   110.39   1255   10   109.94   110.39   1246   10   109.80   110.57   109.80   110.39
tc2c320s38ct0   1782    9   158.59   159.53   1617   10   158.30   159.06   1580   10   158.30   159.06   1586   10   157.81   158.88   157.81   158.88
tc2c320s38ct1   1093   10    85.90    86.81   1038   10    86.52    86.95   1049   10    86.52    86.95   1074   10    86.26    86.85    85.90    86.81
tc2c320s38ct4   1204   10   109.50   110.12   1191   10   109.75   110.13   1164   10   109.75   110.13   1187   10   109.85   110.18   109.50   110.12




                                                                            40
