                                                    Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx



                                                      Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                            Transportation Research Part C
                                         journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trc




Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing
problem with time windows
Merve Keskin, Bülent Çatay ⇑
Sabanci University, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, 34956 Tuzla, Istanbul, Turkey



a r t i c l e        i n f o                          a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                      The Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (EVRPTW) is an extension to the
Received 30 May 2015                                  well-known Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW) where the fleet con-
Received in revised form 16 January 2016              sists of electric vehicles (EVs). Since EVs have limited driving range due to their battery
Accepted 16 January 2016
                                                      capacities they may need to visit recharging stations while servicing the customers along
Available online xxxx
                                                      their route. The recharging may take place at any battery level and after the recharging the
                                                      battery is assumed to be full. In this paper, we relax the full recharge restriction and allow
Keywords:
                                                      partial recharging (EVRPTW-PR), which is more practical in the real world due to shorter
Electric vehicle
Vehicle routing problem with time windows
                                                      recharging duration. We formulate this problem as a 0–1 mixed integer linear program
Adaptive large neighborhood search                    and develop an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) algorithm to solve it effi-
Metaheuristics                                        ciently. We apply several removal and insertion mechanisms by selecting them dynami-
Partial recharge                                      cally and adaptively based on their past performances, including new mechanisms
                                                      specifically designed for EVRPTW and EVRPTW-PR. These new mechanisms include the
                                                      removal of the stations independently or along with the preceding or succeeding cus-
                                                      tomers and the insertion of the stations with determining the charge amount based on
                                                      the recharging decisions. We test the performance of ALNS by using benchmark instances
                                                      from the recent literature. The computational results show that the proposed method is
                                                      effective in finding high quality solutions and the partial recharging option may signifi-
                                                      cantly improve the routing decisions.
                                                                                                           Ó 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

   Electric vehicles (EVs) move with electric propulsion and can be used in a variety of transport needs such as public trans-
portation, home deliveries from grocery stores, postal deliveries and courier services, and distribution operations in different
sectors. Although EVs enable zero- or low-emission logistics services, operating an EV fleet has several drawbacks such as: (i)
low energy density of batteries compared to the fuel of combustion engined vehicles; (ii) limited number of public charging
stations; and (iii) long recharging times (Touati-Moungla and Jost, 2012). Battery swap may remedy the last; however, swap-
ping raises additional issues in battery design and compatibility, battery degradation, ownership, and swap station infras-
tructure. Under these limitations, routing an EV fleet arises as a challenging combinatorial optimization problem in the
Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) literature.
   The Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (EVRPTW) was introduced by Schneider et al. (2014) as an
extension to the Green Vehicle Routing Problem (GVRP) of Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012). GVRP concerns ‘‘green”


 ⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +90 (216) 483 9531; fax: +90 (216) 483 9550.
    E-mail addresses: mervekeskin@sabanciuniv.edu (M. Keskin), catay@sabanciuniv.edu (B. Çatay).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
0968-090X/Ó 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
2                                      M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


vehicles which run with biodiesel, liquid natural gas, or CNG, and have a limited driving range. Hence, the vehicles may need
refueling along their route. Refueling is fast; however, the stations for these fuels are scarce. EVRPTW is a variant of the clas-
sical VRPTW where the fleet consists of EVs that may need to visit stations to have their batteries recharged in order to con-
tinue their route, as in GVRP. On the other hand, the recharging operation may take a significant amount of time, especially
when compared to relatively short refueling times of liquid fuels. Recharging may take place at any battery level and the
recharge time is proportional to the amount charged. After the recharge the battery is assumed to be full. The number of
stations is usually small and the stations are dispersed in distant locations, which increases the difficulty of the problem.
In this paper, we relax the full recharging (FR) restriction and allow partial recharging (PR) which is more practical in the
real world due to shorter recharging duration. When the vehicle visits a station near the end of its route, FR may not be
needed for the vehicle to return to the depot. A similar situation may exist between two consecutive recharges. Saving from
recharging time may allow the vehicle to catch the time window of an otherwise unvisited customer, thus, may improve the
solution.
   In the PR scheme, the recharge quantity is associated with a continuous decision variable. We refer to this problem as
EVRPTW and Partial Recharges (EVRPTW-PR) and formulate it as 0–1 mixed integer linear program. Note that determining
the recharge quantities brings significant difficulties to the problem. Since the problem is intractable for large instances, we
propose an Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) approach to solve it efficiently. ALNS is based on the destroy-and-
repair framework where at each iteration the existing feasible solution is destroyed by removing some customers and
recharging stations from their routes and then repaired by inserting the removed customers to the solution along with sta-
tions when recharging is necessary. Several removal and insertion algorithms are applied by selecting them dynamically and
adaptively based on their past performances. The new solution is accepted according to the Simulated Annealing criterion.
Our approach combines the removal and insertion mechanisms presented in Ropke and Pisinger (2006a, 2006b), Pisinger and
Ropke (2007) and Demir et al. (2012) with some new mechanisms designed specifically for EVRPTW and EVRPTW-PR. Our
computational tests show that the proposed ALNS is effective in finding good quality solutions and improves some of the
best-known solutions in the literature. Furthermore, our results reveal that the PR scheme may substantially improve the
routing decisions.
   The contributions of this study can be summarized as follows:

     We extend EVRPTW to a PR scheme, which is more general and practical, and present the mathematical programming
      formulation of the problem.
     We propose an effective ALNS method to solve the EVRPTW and EVRPTW-PR. The proposed method introduces new
      removal and insertion mechanisms to tackle the more complex problem structure of VRPs where the fleet consists of EVs.
     We validate the performance of the proposed method using the EVRPTW instances of Schneider et al. (2014) and improve
      the best-known solutions of four problems.
     We show that the PR scheme may improve the solutions obtained with the FR scheme substantially.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related studies in the literature. Section 3
describes the problem and formulates the mathematical model. The proposed ALNS method is presented in Section 4. Sec-
tion 5 provides the computational study and discusses the results. Finally, concluding remarks and future research directions
are given in Section 6.


2. Related literature

   There are relatively few studies on route optimization of AFVs. Artmeier et al. (2010) studied this problem within a graph-
theoretic context and proposes extensions to general shortest path algorithms that address the problem of energy-optimal
routing. They formalize energy-efficient routing in the presence of rechargeable batteries as a special case of the constrained
shortest path problem and present an adaption of a general shortest path algorithm that respects the given constraints.
Wang and Shen (2007) developed a model that minimizes the number of tours and total deadhead time hierarchically.
The driving range of the vehicle is limited but the charging durations, time windows and vehicle capacities are not consid-
ered. A multiple ant colony algorithm was proposed to solve the problem.
   Conrad and Figliozzi (2011) introduced the Recharging VRP (RVRP), a new variant of the VRP where the EVs are allowed to
recharge at selected customer locations. The model has dual objectives: the primary objective minimizes the number of
routes or vehicles whereas the secondary objective minimizes the total costs associated with the travel distance, service time
and vehicle recharging. The latter is a penalty cost incurred at each recharge. The EV is charged while servicing the customer
and the charging time is constant. The battery level departing from a customer depends on the choice of full charge or partial
charging. In the partial charge case the battery is charged to a specified level such as 80% of battery capacity. Conrad and
Figliozzi (2011) used an iterative construction and improvement procedure to solve this problem but did not provide its
details.
   Wang and Cheu (2012) investigated the operations of an electric taxi fleet. Their model minimizes total distance traveled
under the recharging constraints and maximum route time. The battery is consumed at a given rate per distance and can be
replenished at the recharging stations. Charging times are constant and after charging the battery becomes full. They con-


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                3


struct an initial solution using one of the nearest-neighbor, sweep and earliest time window insertion heuristics and improve
it using Tabu Search (TS). They also suggested three different recharging plans which provide different driving ranges and
compared the results against the full charging scheme.
    Omidvar and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam (2012) tackled an AFV routing problem with time-windows and proposed a math-
ematical model that minimizes total costs related to the vehicles, distance traveled, travel time and emissions. The refueling
times are assumed constant. They used the Simulated Annealing (SA) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) approaches and compared
their performances. Worley and Klabjan (2012) addressed the problem of locating recharging stations and designing EV
routes simultaneously. The objective is to minimize the sum of the travel costs, recharging costs, and costs of locating
recharging stations. A solution method was not proposed and left as future work.
    Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012) considered the routing of AFVs within the context GVRP and formulated the mathemat-
ical model. The model aims at minimizing the total distance traveled where the length of the routes is restricted. Fuel is con-
sumed with a given rate per traveled distance and can be replenished at the alternative fuel stations. Refueling times are
assumed to be fixed and after refueling the tank becomes full. The model does not involve time windows and vehicle capac-
ity constraints. Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks (2012) proposed two heuristics to solve the GVRP. The first is a Modified Clarke
and Wright Savings (MCWS) algorithm which creates routes by establishing feasibility through the insertion of AFSs, merg-
ing feasible routes according to savings values, and removing redundant AFSs. The second is a Density-Based Clustering Algo-
rithm (DBCA) based on the cluster-first and route-second approach. DBCA forms clusters of customers such that every vertex
within a given radius contains at least a predefined number of neighbors. Subsequently, the MCWS algorithm is applied to
the identified clusters. To test the performance of these two heuristics, they designed two sets of problem instances. The first
consists of 40 small-sized instances with 20 customers while the second involves 12 instances with up to 500 customers.
    Recently, Felipe et al. (2014) extended GVRP for EVs by allowing partial recharges using multiple technologies, i.e. using
different power options. As in GVRP, the problem does not involve time windows but EVs have capacity and total route dura-
tion limits. The authors formulated the mathematical programming model and presented constructive and deterministic
local search algorithms as well as a metaheuristic extension based on an SA framework. The computational tests on both
randomly generated and GVRP data showed that using partial recharge strategies and providing multiple recharge technolo-
gies could achieve cost and energy savings and ensure feasibility in some instances.
    Schneider et al. (2014) developed a hybrid metaheuristic that combines the Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) algo-
rithm with TS for solving EVRPTW. They tested the performance of the proposed method on benchmark instances of GVRP
and Multi-Depot VRP with Inter-Depot Routes. They also generated new instances for EVRPTW by modifying Solomon (1987)
data and reported their results. Desaulniers et al. (2014) tackled the same problem by considering four recharging strategies
(single-FR, single-PR, multiple-FR, and multiple-PR) and attempted to solve them optimality using branch-price-and-cut
algorithms. Goeke and Schneider (2015) extended EVRPTW to the routing of a mixed fleet of EVs and internal combustion
engine (ICE) vehicles. Their objective function consisted of an energy consumption function of speed, gradient, and cargo
load distribution, and they proposed an ALNS approach to solve it. Hiermann et al. (2015) addressed the Fleet Size and
Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows where the fleet consists of EVs. They also implemented an ALNS algorithm
equipped with local search and labeling procedures.


3. Problem description and model formulation

    EVRPTW-PR concerns a set of customers with known demands, delivery time windows, and service durations. The deliv-
eries are performed by a homogeneous fleet of EVs with fixed loading capacities and limited cruising ranges. While the vehi-
cle is traveling, the battery charge level decreases proportionally with the distance traversed and the vehicle may need to
visit a recharging station in order to continue its route. The battery is recharged at any quantity and the duration of the
recharge depends on the initial state of battery charge. Unlike EVRPTW where the vehicle departs from the depot/station
with full battery and arrives at the depot/station with any state of charge, in EVRPTW-PR the vehicle departs from the depot
fully charged but may arrive at/depart from a station with any state of charge and it returns to depot with an empty battery if
it has been recharged once during its route.
    Fig. 1 illustrates an example involving ten customers (C1–C10), four stations (S1–S4), and the depot (D) which can also be
used for recharging. The percentage values along the routes show the battery state of charge when the vehicle arrives at a
customer or a station and when it departs from the station after having its battery recharged. EV1 services C1 and C2, returns
to the depot without any recharging. EV2 visits S1 after servicing C4 and has its battery recharged before visiting C5 and C3.
On the other hand, EV3 is recharged once in S4 and twice in S3. Note that a station can be visited multiple times by the same
(see S3) or different vehicles and each station is not necessarily visited (see S2). In what follows, we provide the mathemat-
ical model for EVRPTW-PR following the notation and formulation of Schneider et al. (2014).
    Let V ¼ f1; . . . ; Ng denote the set of customers and F denote the set of recharging stations. Since a recharging station may
be visited more than once depending on the route structure, we create F 0 which is the set of dummy vertices generated to
permit several visits to each vertex in the set F. Vertices 0 and N þ 1 denote the depot and every route starts at 0 and ends at
N þ 1. Let V 0 be the set of vertices with V 0 ¼ V [ F 0 . In order to indicate that a set contains the respective instance of the depot,
the set is subscripted with 0 or N þ 1. Hence, F 00 ¼ F 0 [ f0g, V 00 ¼ V 0 [ f0g, and V 0Nþ1 ¼ V 0 [ fN þ 1g. Now we can define the
problem on a complete directed graph G ¼ ðV 00;Nþ1 ; AÞ with the set of arcs A ¼ fði; jÞji; j 2 V 00;Nþ1 ; i–jg. Each arc is associated


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
4                                                          M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


                                                                                   70%
                                                                          S1                        C5
                                                                 40%                      50%


                                                                                          20%
                                                              C4                                                S2
                                                                                               C3
                                                              80%
                                                                               2     0%                                         30%
                                                                       100%                                     60%                   S4    80%
                                                                                         100%
                                                                               D                                      C6
                                                    C2              10%                        3
                                                                           1              0%                                                      40%
                                                                               100%                                             40%
                                                     60%
                                                                                                                       10%            S3          C10
                                                                               80%                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                  70%
                                                                        C1
                                                                                                                                60%
                                                                                                C7                                         C9   20%
                                                                                                                           C8
                                                                                                      40%

                                                                                    Fig. 1. An illustrative example.



with a distance dij and travel time t ij . The battery charge is consumed at a rate of h and every traveled arc consumes h  dij of
the remaining battery. Each customer i 2 V 0 has positive demand qi , service time si and time window ½ei ; li . All EVs have a
load capacity of C and a battery capacity of Q . At a recharging station, the battery is charged at a recharging rate of g.
The decision variables, si , ui and yi keep track of the service starting time, remaining cargo level and battery state of charge
on arriving to station i 2 V 00;Nþ1 , respectively. The binary decision variable xij takes value 1 if arc ði; jÞ is traversed and 0 other-
wise. In Schneider et al. (2014) the battery is always recharged to full capacity, i.e. the recharge amount is ðQ  yi Þ. EVRPTW-
PR allows partial recharges by defining a new decision variable Y i which represents the battery state of charge on departure
from station i.
                             X
       min                                dij xij                                                                                                        ð1Þ
                      i2V 00 ;j2V 0nþ1 ;i–j


subject to
          X
                      xij ¼ 1 8i 2 V                                                                                                                     ð2Þ
       j2V 0nþ1 ;i–j

          X
                      xij 6 1 8i 2 F 0                                                                                                                   ð3Þ
       j2V 0nþ1 ;i–j

         X                       X
                     xij                     xji ¼ 0 8j 2 V 0                                                                                           ð4Þ
       i2V 00 ;i–j           i2V 0nþ1 ;i–j



       si þ ðtij þ si Þxij  l0 ð1  xij Þ 6 sj 8i 2 V 0 ; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ; i–j                                                                             ð5Þ

       si þ tij xij þ gðY i  yi Þ  ðl0 þ gQÞð1  xij Þ 6 sj 8i 2 F 0 ; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ; i–j                                                               ð6Þ

       ej 6 sj 6 lj              8j 2 V 00;nþ1                                                                                                           ð7Þ

       0 6 uj 6 ui  qi xij þ Cð1  xij Þ 8i 2 V 00 ; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ;                                 i–j                                                  ð8Þ

       0 6 u0 6 C                                                                                                                                        ð9Þ

       0 6 yj 6 yi  ðh  dij Þxij þ Q ð1  xij Þ 8i 2 V; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ;                                   i–j                                           ð10Þ

       0 6 yj 6 Y i  ðh  dij Þxij þ Q ð1  xij Þ 8i 2 F 00 ; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ; i–j                                                                        ð11Þ

       yi 6 Y i 6 Q                8i 2 F 00                                                                                                            ð12Þ

       xij 2 f0; 1g 8i 2 V 00 ; 8j 2 V 0nþ1 ; i–j                                                                                                       ð13Þ




Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                5


   The objective function (1) minimizes total distance traveled. Constraints (2) and (3) handle the connectivity of customers
and visits to recharging stations, respectively. The flow conservation constraints (4) enforce that the number of outgoing arcs
equals to the number of incoming arcs at each vertex. Constraints (5) and (6) ensure the time feasibility of arcs leaving the
customers (and the depot), and the stations, respectively. Constraints (7) enforce the time windows of the customers and the
depot. In addition, constraints (5)–(7) eliminate the sub-tours. Constraints (8) and (9) guarantee that demand of all cus-
tomers are satisfied. Constraints (10) and (11) keep track of the battery state of charge and make sure that it is never neg-
ative. Constraints (12) determine the battery state of charge after the recharge at a station and make sure that the battery
state of charge does not exceed its capacity. Finally, constraints (13) define the binary decision variables.

Proposition 1. If an optimal solution exists such that an EV leaves the depot with its battery partially charged, i.e. Y 0 < 1, then the
same EV departing from the depot fully charged is also optimal, i.e. Y 0 ¼ 1 is also optimal.



Proof. Let Y 0 < 1 be optimal. Since fully recharging the battery at the depot does not delay the departure time of the EV,
Y 0 ¼ 1 must also be optimal. h


Corollary 1. If Y 0 < 1 is optimal, then the problem has infinite multiple optima.


Proof. Let Y 0 < 1 be optimal and Y 0 þ e 6 1 not, where e is a small positive scalar. Then following Proposition 1, multiple
optima exist such that Y 0 6 Y 0 6 1. h


Proposition 2. If an optimal solution exists such that an EV has been recharged at least once and returns to the depot at the end of
its route with positive battery state, i.e. ynþ1 > 0, then its return to the depot with empty battery is also optimal, i.e. ynþ1 ¼ 0 is also
optimal.


Proof. Let ynþ1 > 0 be optimal. Since recharging the battery with less energy at the preceding station does not delay the
departure time to cause any time window infeasibility, ynþ1 ¼ 0 must also be optimal. h


Corollary 2. If ynþ1 > 0 is optimal, then the problem has infinite multiple optima.


           ynþ1 > 0 be optimal and 
Proof. Let                          ynþ1 þ e not, where e is a small positive scalar. Then following Proposition 2, multiple
optima exist such that 0 6 ynþ1 6 
                                   ynþ1 . h

   Without loss of generality, we assume that an EV departs from the depot with a battery charged in full and returns to the
depot with its battery fully consumed if it has been recharged at least once along its route.

4. Solution methodology

   We propose an ALNS method to solve the EVRPTW-PR. ALNS was introduced by Ropke and Pisinger (2006a) as an exten-
sion of the Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) framework put forward by Shaw (1998). Since local search methods can only
make small changes to an existing solution their search space is narrow. Hence, they are unable to move from one promising
area to another within the feasible region. To overcome this shortcoming, Ropke and Pisinger (2006a) considered large
moves that rearrange up to 40% of the vertices instead of using small moves that relocate or exchange only a few arcs or
vertices at each iteration. In a subsequent study, Ropke and Pisinger (2006b) developed a unified ALNS heuristic for a large
class of VRP with Backhauls. Pisinger and Ropke (2007) improved this heuristic with additional algorithms and showed that
the proposed framework gives competitive results in different VRP variants. Since then, ALNS has been successfully imple-
mented to solve various VRPs, e.g. cumulative capacitated VRP (Ribeiro and Laporte, 2012), pollution-routing problem
(Demir et al., 2012), two-echelon VRP (Hemmelmayr et al., 2012), pickup and delivery problems with transshipment (Qu
and Bard, 2012) and with vehicle transfers (Masson et al., 2013), VRP with multiple routes (Azi et al., 2014), periodic inven-
tory routing problem (Aksen et al., 2014), and production routing problem (Adulyasak et al., 2014).

4.1. Overview of the proposed ALNS approach

4.1.1. Initial solution construction
   The initial solution is obtained by iteratively constructing feasible routes. The route construction begins with the nearest
customer to the depot. Then, the insertion costs of all unassigned customers to all possible existing positions in the route are
determined respecting the time window constraints, i.e. the insertion of customer i between nodes j and k is calculated as


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
6                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


dji þ dik  djk if customers i, j, and k can be visited within their time windows. Next, the best insertion is performed. If no
customer can be inserted because of low battery level, we use the Greedy Station Insertion algorithm described in Sec-
tion 4.2.2 and insert a customer along with a recharging station. In that case, the insertion cost becomes the difference
between the total distance of the route after and before the insertions of the customer and the recharging station. When
no customer can be inserted to the route due to capacity or time-window constraints the route is finalized and the procedure
is repeated by starting with a new route until all customers have been visited. The pseudocode of the initial solution con-
struction procedure is given in Algorithm 1.

    Algorithm 1: Initial solution construction
    1: Start a new route with the customer closest to the depot
    2: repeat
    3:    Calculate insertion costs of all unserved customers to the current route
    4:    if no customer can be added then
    5:         Start a new route with the unserved customer closest to the depot
    6:    else
    7:         Select the customer which increases the distance least and make the insertion
    8:    end if
    9:    if a recharging station is needed then
    10:          Perform Greedy Station Insertion
    11:   end if
    12: until all customers are served




4.1.2. ALNS procedure
    The proposed ALNS heuristic includes four classes of algorithms: Customer Removal (CR), Customer Insertion (CI), Station
Removal (SR), and Station Insertion (SI). After the initial solution has been constructed, ALNS tries to improve it iteratively
until a stopping condition is satisfied. We use an iteration number limit to terminate the heuristic. At each iteration, the
existing feasible solution is destroyed by removing some nodes from their routes using a removal algorithm. These nodes
consist of customers, recharging stations, or both. The resulting partial solution is then repaired using an insertion algorithm
which heuristically inserts removed customers and/or recharging stations (removed or other) to the existing or new routes
in an attempt to obtain a better solution than the previous. Several removal and insertion algorithms are applied by selecting
them dynamically and adaptively based on a probability calculated using their performances in the previous iterations. In
order to calculate the selection probabilities, an adaptive weight w and a score p is assigned to each algorithm. High score
corresponds to a successful mechanism and hence the mechanism should be selected with larger probability. Initially, all
weights are equal and all scores are 0. In an iteration, if a new best solution has been found, then the scores corresponding
to the removal and insertion algorithms which achieved that solution are increased by r1 . If the algorithms have yielded a
better solution than the previous then the scores are increased by r2 . Finally, if the new solution is worse than the previous
but accepted using the simulated annealing rule then the scores are increased by r3 . The procedure is divided into segments
which consist of N C iterations for customer related mechanisms and N S for station related mechanisms. At the end of each
segment s, the weight of algorithm a is updated using the formula wsþ1                a   ¼ wsa ð1  qÞ þ qpa =ha , where q is the roulette wheel
parameter, ha is the number of times it was used during segment s and pa is the score associated with algorithm a. After
updating the weights, the probabilities of the algorithms which will be used in the next segment (s + 1) are calculated using
                                       P
the formula P sþ1        a      ¼ wsa = m    s
                                        l¼1 wl and the scores are reset to zero.
    The simulated annealing (SA) approach that accepts or rejects a solution is implemented as follows: if the number of vehi-
cles in the new solution is smaller than that of the current best solution or if they are equal but the total distance of the new
solution is shorter then we accept the new solution. On the other hand, we reject the new solution if it requires more vehi-
cles. When the numbers of vehicles are equal but the distance is longer the new solution is accepted with probability
eðf ðX New Þf ðX Current Þ=T , where f ðXÞ denotes the total distance of solution X, X New and X Current are the new and current best solutions,
respectively, and T is the current temperature. T is initially set to T init and decreased at every iteration using the formula
T ¼ T  e, where 0 < e < 1 is the cooling rate parameter. T init is determined using the initial temperature control parameter
l such that a solution which is l% worse than the initial solution is accepted with probability 0.5.

4.2. Removal algorithms

4.2.1. Customer removal
   The current solution is destroyed by removing c customers from the solution according to different rules and adding them
in a removal list L. c depends on the total number of customers nc and is determined randomly between nc and nc using a
uniform distribution. The removal algorithms are selected in an adaptive manner from the set of algorithms CR.



Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                7


    We utilize Random, Worst-Distance, Worst-Time, Shaw, Proximity-Based, Demand-Based, Time-Based, Zone Removal algo-
rithms presented in the literature and adopt the Route Removal algorithms presented in Emeç et al. (2016). Random Removal
algorithm selects c customers randomly and removes them from the solution. Worst-Distance Removal algorithm determi-
nes customers with high cost, where cost is the sum of distances of the customer from the preceding and succeeding nodes in
the route. Then, it removes the customer with bjcjkj cth highest cost where k 2 ½0; 1 is a random number and j P 1 is a
parameter which introduces randomness in the selection of customers to avoid the selection of the same customers repeat-
edly and is referred to as worst removal determinism factor. Worst-Time Removal algorithm is similar to Worst-Distance
Removal algorithm where the cost of customer i is calculated as jsi  ei j.
     Shaw Removal is designed to remove customers that are similar to each other with respect to several criteria and uses
the following relatedness measure: Rij ¼ /dij þ /2 jei  ej j þ /3 lij þ /4 jDi  Dj j where /1  /4 are the Shaw parameters and
lij ¼ 1 if i and j are in the same route, and 1 otherwise. Small Rij means high similarity. The algorithm first selects a
customer i randomly. Then, it sorts the non-removed customers in the non-decreasing order of their relatedness value
with a customer i and chooses the customer listed in position bjcjkg c where g is a parameter called Shaw removal
determinism factor. Proximity, Demand and Time-Based Removals are the special cases of Shaw Removal where
/1 ; /2 ; /4 takes value 1, respectively and the other parameters are assumed to be 0. In the Zone Removal, the Cartesian
coordinate system in which the nodes are located is divided into nZ many smaller areas that are called as zones. A zone
is randomly selected and all the customers in that zone are removed from the solution. More details of these algorithms
can be found in Demir et al. (2012).
     Random Route Removal (RRR) randomly chooses x routes and removes all the customers visited in those routes. x
depends on the number of routes in the current solution and is determined randomly between 10% and mr % of total
number of routes. Greedy Route Removal (GRR) algorithm removes x routes in a greedy way. x is determined in the same
way as in RRR. The routes are sorted in the non-decreasing order of the number of customers serviced and x routes are
removed starting from the first route in the order. The motivation is to distribute the customers in shorter routes into
other existing routes in the solution in an attempt to reduce the number of vehicles. The procedure is illustrated in
Fig. 2 for x = 2.
     Note that after a predetermined number of iterations N RR we explicitly perform RRR and GRR for nRR iterations to exten-
sively attempt to reduce the number of vehicles used. RRR and GRR remove the complete routes from the solution. On the
other hand, since other removal algorithms remove customers from their routes the battery state, time, and remaining
capacity of the EV at its arrival to a node should be updated. Furthermore, some recharges may no longer be necessary
and those stations may be removed from the solution. In fact, an EV may visit a recharging station right before or after ser-
vicing a customer, and it might be beneficial to remove the customer from the solution with its preceding or succeeding sta-
tion. So, we introduce the following two operators for the customer removal algorithms in addition to removing customers
only (RCO) option:
     Remove Customer with Preceding Station (RCwPS): We remove the customer in the removal list along with the preceding
station, if any exists. The idea is to eliminate the visit to a station where recharging is not necessarily needed at that battery
state if EV no longer visits the removed customer.
     Remove Customer with Succeeding Station (RCwSS): We remove the customer in the removal list along with the succeeding
station, if any exists. The idea is similar to RCwPS. The recharging may be needed after departing from a customer in order to
be able to reach the next customer in the route. In that case, recharging is not necessarily needed at that battery state if the
departure customer is removed from the solution and the station can be removed as well.




                                                C5              S1                                         C5                S1
                                 C4                                                         C4
                       C3                                                        C3
                                                                     C6                                                           C6
                                           D                                                          D

                       C2                                  C7                    C2                                     C7


                               C1                        C8                               C1                       C8
                                      C9                                                         C9
                                                 S2                                                         S2


                               (a) Current feasible solution                                   (b) Solution after GRR

                                                      Fig. 2. Illustration of Greedy Route Removal.




Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
8                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


4.2.2. Station removal
   The recharging stations are the crucial components of the problem. Hence, removing them or changing their positions in
the visit sequence of a route may also improve the solution. So, after a pre-determined number of iterations, an SR (followed
by a Station Insertion) procedure is applied. The number of stations to be removed r is determined in a similar fashion to c
based on the total number of stations in the current station. The Random Station and Worst Distance Station Removal mech-
anisms are similar to their customer removal counterparts. We also use the Worst-Charge Usage Station Removal which aims
at removing the stations visited with high battery levels and Full Charge Station Removal which aims at promoting the PR
option.
   Worst-Charge Usage Station Removal: The motivation of this algorithm is to make use of the battery as much as possible
before a recharging is needed and increase the efficiency in using the stations. We promote the removal of the stations which
an EV visits with relatively higher charge level. The stations are sorted in the non-increasing order of the battery level of the
EVs that visit them for recharging and r stations are removed starting from the first station in the order.
   Full Charge Station Removal: The algorithm identifies the stations where EVs are fully charged and removes c of them
randomly.
   After the removal algorithms, the destroyed solution may become infeasible with respect to the state of charge. Consider
the route shown in Fig. 3(a) as an example. The% numbers above the route indicate the state of charge at the arrival to and
departure from a node whereas the numbers under the route show the arrival and departure times. When S1 is removed
from the route, the EV can still visit C1 and C2 in the given sequence. However, since its battery is empty, the recharging
takes longer at S2, which delays its arrival to C3. Since the EV departs from C3 at a later time, it cannot return to D before
the latest arrival time of 550 as shown in Fig. 3(b).
   Fig. 4 illustrates how the battery infeasibility may occur after a SR. Consider the feasible route in Fig. 4(a). The EV is
charged to full at S1. However, when S1 is removed, the battery level is not sufficient to return to the depot after visiting
C3 as shown in Fig. 4(b).


4.3. Insertion algorithms

4.3.1. Customer insertion
   We use the Greedy and Regret Insertion algorithms from the literature. Greedy Insertion algorithm determines the best
insertion position for customer i by calculating the cost of inserting it between all feasible pairs of nodes j and k and selecting
the position with the minimum cost. The procedure is repeated for all customers and the customer who has the minimum
insertion cost is inserted to its designated position. Regret-k Insertion prevents the myopic nature of Greedy Insertion by



                             100%       80%-100%                 80%             40%            20%-100%             70%      50%

                         D                  S1                   C1             C2                  S2               C3         D
                          0             20-80                  100-110         200-210             230-470          500-510    530

                                                               (a) Feasible route before SR


                                        100%             60%              20%            0%-100%          70%        50%

                                    D                     C1              C2               S2             C3              D
                                    0                    40-50           200-210         230-530         560-570       590

                                                         (b) Time-window infeasible route after SR

                                                   Fig. 3. Example of time-window infeasibility after SR.



                                            100%         60%             20%             0%-100%          70%       50%

                                        D                 C1             C2                S1             C3          D

                                                                 (a) Feasible route before SR


                                                       100%        60%             20%             0%        -20%

                                                   D               C1              C2              C3           D

                                                           (b) Battery infeasible route after SR

                                                        Fig. 4. Example of battery infeasibility after SR.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                9


avoiding the customers which may yield higher costs in the subsequent iterations. It calculates the difference between the
cost of the first and kth best insertions of the customers and insert the one with the highest difference to its best position. In
our ALNS we utilize Regret-2 and Regret-3 methods. In addition, we propose the Time Based Insertion and adapt the Zone Inser-
tion of Demir et al. (2012) as follows:
    Time Based Insertion: In this algorithm, the insertion cost is calculated as the difference between the total route times
before and after the insertion of a customer. For each customer, the algorithm determines the best insertion position among
all routes based on this insertion cost. The customer that increases the route time the least is selected and inserted. The pro-
cedure is repeated for the remaining customers until all customers are inserted. The aim of this algorithm is to increase the
number of customers visited by an EV by combining compatible customers with respect to their time windows or distances.
    Zone Insertion: The algorithm uses the Time Based Insertion criterion above when selecting a customer. However, instead
of investigating all routes in the solution, it considers the routes within a randomly selected zone only. The zones are deter-
mined in the same way with Zone Removal.
    Note that a customer insertion may be feasible with respect to service time-window but infeasible with respect to the
battery state (referred to as battery infeasibility). In that case, the Greedy Station Insertion (described in Section 4.2.2) is
applied to make the destroyed solution charge feasible.
    To determine the battery state of charge and the recharge amount at a station visited in the implementation of CI algo-
rithms we use the assumptions stated at the end of Section 3: an EV departs from the depot with a full battery and returns to
the depot by completely consuming its battery if it has been recharged at least once along its route. So, in the case the EV is
recharged only once during its route then: (i) if the customer is inserted between the depot and the station the insertion only
affects the arrival state of charge at the station; (ii) if the customer is inserted between the station and the depot the recharge
amount is increased such that the EV returns to the depot with empty battery.
    If multiple recharges exist along the route and the customer is inserted between the depot and the first station visited, we
follow the procedure (i) described above. If the customer is inserted between two consecutive stations or between the last
station visited and the depot the amount recharged at the last station visited is increased by the additional energy needed to
visit that customer. If the recharge duration makes the insertion infeasible with respect to service time window of an existing
customer, then we attempt to reduce the recharge duration by increasing the battery charge level at the arrival to that sta-
tion. This is achieved by recharging the EV longer at the previous station making sure that the time-window feasibility of the
customers visited between these two consecutive stations is maintained. In any case, if the insertion is feasible with respect
to service time window but battery infeasible the Greedy Station Insertion (see Section 4.2.2) is applied to make the
destroyed solution charge feasible.

4.3.2. Station insertion
   After removing some stations, the current feasible solution may become battery infeasible. In order to repair the solution,
stations must be inserted to the infeasible routes. We make an infeasible route feasible by identifying the first customer at
which the vehicle arrives with a negative battery level and inserting a station into the partial route prior to that customer.
The difference from CI algorithms is that SI algorithms do not necessarily insert the stations which have been removed in SR.
Since the stations are always available and it is assumed that as many stations as needed are available, any station can be
inserted throughout the algorithm. The SR and SI procedures are illustrated on an example in Fig. 5. A feasible route is
depicted in Fig. 5(a). Suppose, S1 is removed using an SR algorithm. Next, S2 is inserted between C1 and C2 by maintaining
both time-window and battery feasibility. The resulting route in Fig. 5(b) is shorter than the initial.
   We use the following three SI algorithms:
   Greedy Station Insertion (GSI): This algorithm determines the first customer in the route at which the vehicle arrives with
negative battery level and inserts the ‘‘best” (which increases the distance least) station on the arc between that customer
and the previous customer. If this insertion is not feasible, then the previous arcs are attempted in the same manner.
   Greedy Station Insertion with Comparison: The algorithm determines the best station on the arc leading to the customer
where the battery level is negative as in GSI and compares the outcome with the case of inserting the corresponding best




                              C1             C2                                              C1              C2


                                                           C3                                                        C3
                D                                                             D
                                      S2                                                             S2


                                                                   S1                                                      S1
                         C5                   C4                                       C5                    C4


                               (a) Feasible solution                              (b) Improved solution after SR and SI

                                               Fig. 5. An improved route after SR and SI procedure.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
10                                     M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


station on the immediate predecessor arc. The insertion which increases the route distance the least is performed. If both
insertions are infeasible, the GSI procedure is applied by considering the previous arcs.
   Best Station Insertion: We determine the best station insertions between the customer that the EV arrives at with negative
battery level and the depot or a previously visited station by considering all the arcs backwards in the route. We select the
best feasible insertion and perform it.

     Algorithm 2: ALNS algorithm
     1:    Generate an initial solution
     2:    j  1
     3:    repeat
     4:        if j  0ðmod N SR Þ then
     5:             Select SR algorithm and remove stations
     6:             Select SI algorithm and repair solution
     7:        else if j  0ðmod N RR Þ then
     8:             for nRR iterations do
     9:                     Select RRR or GRR algorithm and remove customers
     10:                    Select CI algorithm and repair solution
     11:             end for
     12:       else
     13:             Select CR algorithm and remove customers
     14:             if destroyed solution infeasible then
     15:                    Perform Greedy Station Insertion
     16:                    Select CI algorithm and repair solution
     17:             end if
     18:       end if
     19:       Using SA criterion to accept/reject solution
     20:        j     jþ1
     21:       if j  0ðmod N C Þ then
     22:             Update adaptive weights of CR and CI algorithms
     23:       else if j  0ðmod N S Þ then
     24:             Update adaptive weights of SR and SI algorithms
     25:       end if
     26:   until stop-criterion met



The procedure is repeated for all customers where the EV arrives with negative battery level. If a station insertion cannot be
performed feasibly, we return to the previous feasible solution. The battery state of the EV and/or the recharge quantities in
the implementation of the SI algorithms are determined in a similar fashion as in CI algorithms.
   The pseudocode of the ALNS approach is provided in Algorithm 2.

5. Computational study

   To validate the performance of the proposed ALNS approach we perform computational experiments using the EVRPTW
data. This data set consists of 36 small and 56 large instances generated by Schneider et al. (2014) based on the well-known
VRPTW instances of Solomon. The large instances include three main problem classes where 100 customers and 21 recharg-
ing stations are clustered (C), randomly distributed (R), and both clustered and randomly distributed (RC) over a 100  100
grid. Each set has also two subsets, type 1 and type 2, which differ by the length of the time windows and the vehicle load
and battery capacities. The small instances include three subsets of 12 problems, each involving 5, 10 and 15 customers
drawn randomly from the large instances.
   We first tuned the parameters values using a subset of EVRPTW instances. Then, we solved the large EVRPTW problems
and compare the results with the benchmarks reported in the literature. Finally, we report the solutions we achieved using
the EVRPTW-PR setting and discuss the results. The algorithm was coded in the Java programming language.

5.1. Parameter tuning

    Our tuning methodology is in line with those adopted in the literature (Ropke and Pisinger, 2006a, 2006b; Pisinger and
Ropke, 2007; Demir et al., 2012; Emeç et al., 2016). We selected six problems and performed ten runs by considering up to 10
values for each parameter. We omitted C1 and C2 problem classes since they usually converged to the same solutions for
different parameter values and did not provide much information about the contribution of the parameter value on the solu-
tion quality. Consequently, we selected the instances R107, RC101, RC104, RC105, R205 and RC205 for parameter tuning.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                        M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                              11


    For each value we calculated the average percent deviation from the average of the best achieved solutions, determined
the one that yielded the least average percent deviation, and fixed the parameter value. We repeated this procedure until all
parameter values had been tuned. In EVRPTW, we set the initial values according to the best values reported in Emeç et al.
(2016). In EVRPTW-PR, we initialized the values using the best values obtained for EVRPTW and performed another param-
eter tuning using the same procedure. The parameters, their considered values and the corresponding deviations, and their
final values selected are given in Appendix A.
    We observed that if the score of the worse solution (r3 ) is greater than the score of the better solution (r2 Þ it allows diver-
sification by rewarding non-improved solutions as noted in Ropke and Pisinger (2006a) and Demir et al. (2012). So, our set-
ting of the parameters r1 , r2 , and r3 also rewards a worse solution more than a better solution as follows: r1 P r3 P r2 .
    Ropke and Pisinger (2006a) set the number of iterations to 25,000 and noted that additional runtime had a minor
contribution to the solution quality. Our convergence analysis showed similar results. So, we also set the number of
iterations to 25,000. The lower and upper limits for the number of customers nc to be removed are set as
nc ¼ minf0:1jNj; 30g and nc ¼ min f0:4jNj; 60g, respectively. The removal algorithms are selected in an adaptive manner
from the set of algorithms CR.


5.2. Numerical results for EVRPTW instances

    In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in the case where partial recharges are not
allowed and aim at validating its performance by benchmarking it against state-of-the-art methodologies designed for solv-
ing that particular case. Table 1 compares our average results and the average of the results reported in Goeke and Schneider
(2015) and Hiermann et al. (2015) to the original results given in Schneider et al. (2014). Our results were obtained using the
parameters tuned to the values given in Appendix A. The benchmark results from the literature were also obtained in the
same way by fixing the parameters of the corresponding algorithm to the values tuned. The first column in Table 1 denotes
the instances. ‘#Veh’ and ‘TD’ refer to the number of vehicles and the total distance, respectively. ‘D%’ is the percentage devi-
ation from the distances reported in Schneider et al. (2014), if the number of vehicles is same, and is calculated as
ðTDSSG  TDM Þ=TDM , where SSG stands for the VNS/TS of Schneider et al. (2014) and M refers to the corresponding method,
i.e. GS for Goeke and Schneider (2015), HPH for Hiermann et al. (2015), and KÇ for this study. A negative D% value means
improvement.
    Our results show that our ALNS approach performs better in type-2 problems but it converges to solutions with one addi-
tional vehicle in several instances as compared to other methods. Even though the performance of Hiermann et al. (2015) is
better in type-1 problems, the overall performance of our approach is similar. We also observe that the recent work of Goeke
and Schneider (2015) has a superior performance, improving many of the best solutions to date. We note that Goeke and
Schneider (2015) used the numbers of vehicles achieved in Schneider et al. (2014) as a priori information to construct their
initial routes, which might have a positive effect both in run time and solution quality. Nevertheless, with fixed parameters
our approach improved the best solutions of 11 instances.
    In Table 2, we report the best solutions we observed throughout our entire experimental study and compare them against
the best known solutions (BKS) from the literature achieved in a similar way. Note that Schneider et al. (2014) and Goeke and
Schneider (2015) reported the best results they obtained throughout all experiments they performed as their BKS whereas
Hiermann et al. (2015) performed their tests with fixed parameters only. The results in Table 2 also show that our ALNS
approach performs better in type-2 problems. Although it finds solutions with one additional vehicle in some instances, it
improved the best known solutions of four instances, of which three are type-1 problems. The new best solutions are indi-
cated in bold. Furthermore, it achieved the same best known solution in 16 instances. In comparison, Schneider et al. (2014)
found the best known solutions in 18 instances whereas Hiermann et al. (2015) and Goeke and Schneider (2015) improved
the solutions of 4 and 30 instances, respectively.
    With respect to computational effort, it is not possible to make a fair comparison among the algorithms since they uti-
lize different processors and data structures. We only note that Schneider et al. (2014), Hiermann et al. (2015), and Goeke
and Schneider (2015) report average run times of 15.34 min,1 15.92 min,2 and 2.78 min,3 respectively, whereas our average
run time is comparable to the first two with 12.26 min.4 Goeke and Schneider (2015) has an outstanding run time perfor-
mance; yet it not possible to assess the contribution of feeding the a priori number of vehicles information to this
performance.


5.3. Experiments on EVRPTW instances using PR scheme

   We first analyze the performance of our ALNS on small EVRPTW instances. This allows us to make a comparison
against the (near-)optimal solutions found by using CPLEX 12.6.1 both for the FR and PR cases. Next, we solve the large

 1
   Intel Core i5 processor with 2.67 GHz speed and 4 GB RAM, operating on Windows 7 Professional.
 2
   Intel Core2 Quad CPU Q6600 processor with 2.40 GHz speed and 4 GB RAM, operating on 64-bit Linux.
 3
   Intel Core i7 processor with 2.8 GHz speed and 8 GB RAM, operating on Windows 7 Enterprise.
 4
   Intel Xeon E5 processor with 3.30 GHz speed and 32 GB RAM, operating on 64-bit Windows 7.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
12                                         M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


Table 1
Average results for EVRPTW obtained with fixed parameters.

     Instance type          SSG                                GS                                  HPH                              KÇ
                            #Veh            TD                 #Veh             D%                 #Veh              D%             #Veh           D%
     c1                     10.67           1050.04            10.67            0.31              10.67              0.16          10.89           0.78
     c2                      4.00            640.92             4.00             0.00               4.00              0.06           4.00           0.00
     r1                     12.83           1268.60            12.83            0.80              13.00              0.11          13.25           0.69
     r2                      2.64            919.04             2.64            0.47               2.64              0.53           2.82          0.07
     rc1                    13.13           1415.84            13.13            0.50              13.00             0.48          13.38           0.13
     rc2                     3.13           1146.76             3.13            0.15               3.13              0.95           3.25           0.08
     Average                                                                    0.41                                 0.25                          0.25

SSG: Schneider et al. (2014), GS: Goeke and Schneider (2015), HPH: Hiermann et al. (2015), and KÇ: Our ALNS.



Table 2
Comparison with the best known solutions of EVRPTW instances.

               BKS                            KÇ                                            BKS                              KÇ
     Inst.     #Veh    TD           Ref.      #Veh       TD            D%        Inst.      #Veh         TD           Ref.   #Veh        TD        D%
     c101      12      1053.83      SSG       12         1053.83        0.00     c201       4              645.16     SSG    4            645.16    0.00
     c102      11      1051.38      GS        11         1056.12        0.45     c202       4              645.16     SSG    4            645.16    0.00
     c103      10      1034.86      GS        11         1001.81        –        c203       4              644.98     SSG    4            644.98    0.00
     c104      10       961.88      GS        10          951.57       1.08     c204       4              636.43     SSG    4            636.43    0.00
     c105      11      1075.37      SSG       11         1075.37        0.00     c205       4              641.13     SSG    4            641.13    0.00
     c106      11      1057.65      HPH       11         1057.65        0.00     c206       4              638.17     SSG    4            638.17    0.00
     c107      11      1031.56      SSG       11         1031.56        0.00     c207       4              638.17     SSG    4            638.17    0.00
     c108      10      1095.66      GS        11         1015.68        –        c208       4              638.17     SSG    4            638.17    0.00
     c109      10      1033.67      GS        10         1069.16        3.32
     r101      18      1663.04      HPH       18         1679.06        0.95     r201       3            1264.82      SSG    3           1265.67    0.07
     r102      16      1487.41      GS        16         1519.80        2.13     r202       3            1052.32      SSG    3           1052.32    0.00
     r103      13      1271.35      GS        13         1312.50        3.14     r203       3             895.54      GS     3            895.54    0.00
     r104      11      1088.43      SSG       12         1071.89        –        r204       2             779.49      GS     2            780.98    0.19
     r105      14      1442.35      GS        15         1383.29        –        r205       3             987.36      GS     3            987.36    0.00
     r106      13      1324.10      GS        14         1276.15        –        r206       3             922.19      GS     3            922.70    0.06
     r107      12      1150.95      GS        12         1148.43       0.22     r207       2             845.26      GS     2            847.14    0.22
     r108      11      1050.04      SSG       11         1051.59        0.15     r208       2             736.12      GS     2            736.12    0.00
     r109      12      1261.31      GS        13         1214.72        –        r209       3             867.05      GS     3            871.22    0.48
     r110      11      1119.50      GS        12         1097.89        –        r210       3             846.20      GS     3            843.65   0.30
     r111      12      1106.19      SSG       12         1109.14        0.27     r211       2             827.89      GS     3            761.56    –
     r112      11      1016.63      GS        11         1038.74        2.13
     rc101     16      1726.91      HPH       16         1731.07        0.24     rc201      4            1444.94      SSG    4           1446.84    0.13
     rc102     14      1552.08      HPH       15         1551.69        –        rc202      3            1410.74      GS     3           1450.34    2.73
     rc103     13      1350.09      GS        13         1351.73        0.12     rc203      3            1055.19      GS     3           1069.27    1.32
     rc104     11      1227.25      GS        11         1232.45        0.42     rc204      3             884.80      GS     3            887.45    0.30
     rc105     14      1475.31      HPH       14         1473.24       0.14     rc205      3            1273.55      GS     3           1277.60    0.32
     rc106     13      1427.21      GS        14         1414.99        –        rc206      3            1188.63      GS     3           1207.64    1.57
     rc107     12      1274.89      SSG       12         1283.05        0.64     rc207      3             985.03      GS     3            994.48    0.95
     rc108     11      1197.83      GS        11         1209.11        0.93     rc208      3             836.29      GS     3            841.34    0.60
     Avg       12.21                          12.52                     0.60                3.19                             3.22                   0.33

SSG: Schneider et al. (2014), GS: Goeke and Schneider (2015), HPH: Hiermann et al. (2015), and KÇ: Our method.



instances using two different ALNS implementations and discuss potential gains that can be achieved through different PR
strategies.


5.3.1. Numerical results for small-size instances
   Schneider et al. (2014) provided the optimal solution for 25 small-size problems and upper bound for the remaining 11
for the FR case using CPLEX 12.2 with a time limit of 7200 s. We solved all these problems with CPLEX 12.6.1 and
confirmed the optimality of these upper bounds. Note that ALNS was also able to find the optimal solution for all these
instances.
   For the PR case, we report the solutions obtained by CPLEX and ALNS in Table 3 in comparison with the optimal solutions
achieved with FR. ‘FR Optimal’ refers to the optimal solution of the FR scheme and ‘t(sec)’ is the run time in seconds. The time
limit for CPLEX is set to 7200 s. ‘DCPLEX %’ denotes the percentage deviation of the total distance of the ALNS solution from the
total distance of the solution found by CPLEX. ‘DFR %’ gives the percentage deviation from the optimal distance of the solution
with the FR scheme and shows the benefit of adopting the PR strategy.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                         M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                 13


Table 3
Comparison of results obtained with CPLEX and ALNS on the small-size instances.

                   FR optimal                PR CPLEX                                   PR ALNS
  Instance         #Veh         TD           #Veh         TD            t(sec)          #Veh         TD            DCPLEX %   DFR %     t(sec)
  C101-5           2            257.75       2            257.75            0.31        2            257.75         0.00        0.00    0.03
  C103-5           1            176.05       1            175.37            2.73        1            175.37         0.00       0.39    0.05
  C206-5           1            242.55       1            242.56            5.38        1            242.56         0.00        0.00    0.07
  C208-5           1            158.48       1            158.48            1.37        1            158.48         0.00        0.00    0.06
  R104-5           2            136.69       2            136.69            0.47        2            136.69         0.00        0.00    0.04
  R105-5           2            156.08       2            156.08            3.39        2            156.08         0.00        0.00    0.04
  R202-5           1            128.78       1            128.78            0.95        1            128.78         0.00        0.00    0.08
  R203-5           1            179.06       1            179.06            1.12        1            179.06         0.00        0.00    0.10
  RC105-5          2            241.30       2            233.77            3.06        2            233.77         0.00       3.22    0.03
  RC108-5          2            253.93       2            253.93            3.76        2            253.93         0.00        0.00    0.04
  RC204-5          1            176.39       1            176.39            2.17        1            176.39         0.00        0.00    0.08
  RC208-5          1            167.98       1            167.98            1.05        1            167.98         0.00        0.00    0.07
  C101-10          3            393.76       3            388.25          50.26         3            388.25         0.00       1.42    0.10
  C104-10          2            273.93       2            273.93           5.15         2            273.93         0.00        0.00    0.17
  C202-10          1            304.06       1            304.06           7.52         1            304.06         0.00        0.00    0.20
  C205-10          2            228.28       2            228.28           2.01         2            228.28         0.00        0.00    0.16
  R102-10          3            249.19       3            249.19           1.83         3            249.19         0.00        0.00    0.11
  R103-10          2            207.05       2            206.12           6.76         2            206.12         0.00       0.45    0.17
  R201-10          1            241.51       1            241.51          11.40         1            241.51         0.00        0.00    0.21
  R203-10          1            218.21       1            218.21           1.62         1            218.21         0.00        0.00    0.62
  RC102-10         4            423.51       4            423.51           3.07         4            423.51         0.00        0.00    0.09
  RC108-10         3            345.93       3            345.93           2.90         3            345.93         0.00        0.00    0.09
  RC201-10         1            412.86       1            412.86        7200.00         1            412.86         0.00        0.00    0.17
  RC205-10         2            325.98       2            325.98           3.26         2            325.98         0.00        0.00    0.19
  C103-15          3            384.29       3            348.46        1008.00         3            348.46         0.00      10.28    0.23
  C106-15          3            275.13       3            275.13           0.47         3            275.13         0.00        0.00    0.15
  C202-15          2            383.62       2            383.62          24.07         2            383.62         0.00        0.00    0.29
  C208-15          2            300.55       2            300.55           0.92         2            300.55         0.00        0.00    0.26
  R102-15          5            413.93       5            412.78        7200.00         5            412.78         0.00       0.28    0.12
  R105-15          4            336.15       4            336.15           1.39         4            336.15         0.00        0.00    0.09
  R202-15          2            358.00       2            358.00         462.89         2            358.00         0.00        0.00    0.51
  R209-15          1            313.24       1            313.24         610.64         1            313.24         0.00        0.00    0.92
  RC103-15         4            397.67       4            397.67          20.27         4            397.67         0.00        0.00    0.12
  RC108-15         3            370.25       3            370.25         101.45         3            370.25         0.00        0.00    0.15
  RC202-15         2            394.39       2            394.39         113.43         2            394.39         0.00        0.00    0.31
  RC204-15         1            407.45       1            403.38        7200.00         1            382.22        5.54       1.01    1.35
  Average                                                                 668.47                                   0.15       0.47    0.21




    The results show that our ALNS is able to solve all small instances very efficiently. CPLEX found the optimal solution for 33
instances within the time limit and ALNS was able to obtain the optimal solution in all these instances. In RC201-10 and
R102-15, we found the same upper bound as CPLEX and in RC204-15 our solution is 5.54% better than the upper bound
provided by CPLEX. The average run time of ALNS is only 0.21 s whereas CPLEX spent 668 s on the average. It should be noted
that the run time of CPLEX is not the time it takes until it finds the optimal solution or the upper bound but the time it stops
after the optimality conditions have been satisfied or the time limit has been reached.
    When we compare the solutions that we found with the PR scheme to the optimal solutions of the FR scheme, we see that
the number of EVs utilized remained same and the routes were improved only in seven instances. We believe that the poten-
tial advantage of the PR strategy is not evident in these instances because their sizes are too restrictive to allow alternate
routes. Nevertheless, the savings in total distance may exceed 10% as we observed in C103-15.

5.3.2. Numerical results for large-size instances
    In our experimental study with the large instances we also implement a strategy where the partial recharge is allowed at
a pre-determined constant amount and test different amounts for comparison purposes. In that case, the implementation of
SI algorithms is same but the PR is performed at a constant level. If the battery is not sufficient to complete the route we
fully recharge the battery at the last station visited before the infeasibility occurs, if the time windows of the customers
permit.
    The results are illustrated in Table 4. The results obtained by of the FR scheme are given in the ‘FR’ column for comparison.
The next three main columns report the best solutions found by ALNS using different PR strategies. ‘q free’ refers to the case
where the PR is performed at any level, i.e. the recharge amount is a decision variable, whereas in ‘q = 0.3’, ‘q = 0.4’, and
‘q = 0.5’ the PR is allowed at the constant levels of 30%, 40%, and 50% of the battery capacity, respectively. Note that in some



Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
14                                         M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


Table 4
EVRPTW-PR results for different recharge strategies.

             FR                  PR (q free)                    PR (q = 0.3)                   PR (q = 0.4)                   PR (q = 0.5)
     Inst.   #Veh     TD         #Veh    TD            D%       #Veh     TD          D%        #Veh     TD           D%       #Veh     TD        D%
     c101    12       1053.83    12      1051.23        0.25   12       1043.38     1.00     12       1045.98       0.75   12       1053.82     0.00
     c102    11       1056.12    11      1034.24        2.12   11       1034.48     2.09     11       1032.49       2.29   11       1040.34    1.52
     c103    11       1001.81    10       973.39         –      10        981.16      –        10       1028.32        –      10       1030.42     –
     c104    10        951.57    10       886.72        7.31   10        891.05     6.79     10        892.84       6.58   10        894.03    6.44
     c105    11       1075.37    11      1037.78        3.62   11       1051.98     2.22     11       1051.98       2.22   11       1054.36    1.99
     c106    11       1057.65    11      1024.18        3.27   11       1030.41     2.64     11       1036.88       2.00   11       1046.57    1.06
     c107    11       1031.56    10      1058.11         –      11       1014.45     1.69     11       1013.63       1.77   11       1013.63    1.77
     c108    11       1015.68    10      1033.50         –      11        999.55     1.61     11       1002.54       1.31   11       1000.62    1.51
     c109    10       1069.16    10       960.03       11.37   10        990.53     7.94     10        947.20      12.88   10        946.84   12.92
     c201     4        645.16     4        629.95       2.41    4        642.84     0.36      4        642.84       0.36    4        641.13    0.63
     c202     4        645.16     4        629.95       2.41    4        641.07     0.64      4        641.07       0.64    4        641.07    0.64
     c203     4        644.98     4        629.95       2.39    4        641.07     0.61      4        641.07       0.61    4        641.07    0.61
     c204     4        636.43     4        629.95       1.03    4        635.80     0.10      4        636.43        0.00    4        636.43     0.00
     c205     4        641.13     4        629.95       1.77    4        638.17     0.46      4        631.26       1.56    4        638.17    0.46
     c206     4        638.17     4        629.95       1.30    4        641.13      0.46      4        631.26       1.09    4        638.17     0.00
     c207     4        638.17     4        629.95       1.30    4        641.13      0.46      4        638.17        0.00    4        638.17     0.00
     c208     4        638.17     4        629.95       1.30    4        634.19     0.63      4        631.26       1.09    4        638.17     0.00
     r101    18       1679.06    18      1661.33        1.07   18       1636.69     2.59     18       1651.80       1.65   18       1679.27     0.01
     r102    16       1519.80    16      1461.48        3.99   16       1466.58     3.63     16       1461.38       4.00   16       1467.92    3.53
     r103    13       1312.50    13      1262.75        3.94   14       1254.22      –        13       1265.90       3.68   13       1276.80    2.80
     r104    12       1071.89    11      1078.99         –      11       1131.39      –        12       1065.14       0.63   12       1065.17    0.63
     r105    15       1383.29    15      1373.94        0.68   15       1380.62     0.19     15       1380.44       0.21   15       1396.79     0.97
     r106    14       1276.15    13      1310.46         –      14       1288.90      0.99     14       1295.60        1.50   14       1284.19     0.63
     r107    12       1148.43    12      1118.91        2.64   12       1132.35     1.42     12       1131.01       1.54   12       1126.42    1.95
     r108    11       1051.59    11      1031.14        1.98   11       1045.97     0.54     11       1044.82       0.65   11       1048.49    0.30
     r109    13       1214.72    13      1201.04        1.14   13       1193.76     1.76     13       1209.30       0.45   13       1194.80    1.67
     r110    12       1097.89    11      1112.80         –      11       1090.92      –        12       1095.98       0.17   12       1093.73    0.38
     r111    12       1109.14    12      1084.13        2.31   12       1102.07     0.64     12       1096.22       1.18   12       1101.27    0.71
     r112    11       1038.74    11      1017.31        2.11   11       1035.16     0.35     11       1017.52       2.09   11       1037.90    0.08
     r201     3       1265.67     3      1266.06a        0.03    3       1266.54       0.07     3       1274.00        0.65    3       1262.10    0.28
     r202     3       1052.32     3      1052.32         0.00    3       1054.70       0.23     3       1053.57        0.12    3       1055.48     0.30
     r203     3        895.54     3       895.54         0.00    3        896.71       0.13     3        895.83        0.03    3        895.70     0.02
     r204     2        780.98     2       780.14        0.11    3        720.15       –        3        723.08        –       2        801.29     2.53
     r205     3        987.36     3       987.36         0.00    3        989.03       0.17     3        995.03        0.77    3        991.52     0.42
     r206     3        922.70     3       922.70         0.00    3        925.40       0.29     3        934.88        1.30    3        925.67     0.32
     r207     2        847.14     2       846.59        0.06    2        853.12       0.70     3        811.63        –       2        849.49     0.28
     r208     2        736.12     2       736.12         0.00    2        736.75       0.09     2        736.75        0.09    2        737.40     0.17
     r209     3        871.22     3       868.95        0.26    3        871.31       0.01     3        872.03        0.09    3        871.55     0.04
     r210     3        843.65     3       843.36        0.03    3        850.84       0.84     3        849.15        0.65    3        850.16     0.77
     r211     3        761.56     2       862.56         –       3        761.56       0.00     3        766.56        0.65    3        766.56     0.65
     rc101   16       1731.07    16      1684.84        2.74   15       1743.90      –        16       1689.40       2.47   16       1704.19    1.58
     rc102   15       1551.69    14      1155.50         –      14       1566.40      –        14       1555.90        –      14       1558.51     –
     rc103   13       1351.73    13      1329.58        1.67   13       1351.51     0.02     13       1342.49       0.69   13       1345.04    0.50
     rc104   11       1232.45    11      1202.93        2.45   11       1226.33     0.50     11       1229.38       0.25   11       1223.79    0.71
     rc105   14       1473.24    14      1458.49        1.01   14       1458.28     1.03     14       1467.44       0.40   14       1470.40    0.19
     rc106   14       1414.99    13      1422.96         –      13       1440.45      –        13       1455.21        –      13       1417.40     –
     rc107   12       1283.05    12      1261.03        1.75   12       1272.09     0.86     12       1265.16       1.41   12       1261.44    1.71
     rc108   11       1209.11    11      1185.68        1.98   11       1184.06     2.12     11       1235.85        2.16   11       1209.64     0.04
     rc201    4       1446.84     4      1446.84         0.00    4       1454.11      0.50      4       1463.70        1.15    4       1456.02     0.63
     rc202    3       1450.34     3      1416.96        2.36    4       1244.76      –         4       1245.10        –       4       1242.59     –
     rc203    3       1069.27     3      1069.27         0.00    3       1089.74      1.88      3       1092.22        2.10    3       1084.06     1.36
     rc204    3        887.45     3       887.76         0.04    3        887.29     0.02      3        892.25        0.54    3        886.23    0.14
     rc205    3       1277.60     3      1262.22        1.22    4       1162.16      –         4       1145.34        –       4       1151.93     –
     rc206    3       1207.64     3      1213.89         0.51    3       1206.09     0.13      3       1208.36        0.06    3       1209.42     0.15
     rc207    3        994.48     3       993.49        0.10    3        996.35      0.19      3        992.14       0.24    3        993.26    0.12
     rc208    3        841.34     3       839.71        0.19    3        847.82      0.76      3        843.98        0.31    3        844.76     0.40
     Avg                                                1.64                        0.80                            0.91                       0.73
 a
      1258.39 was also observed during our tests.




instances, the results obtained using the PR scheme are worse than the best results found with the FR scheme. For
consistency, we preferred to give them as reported by ALNS even though the solutions to EVRPTW are also feasible to
EVRPTW-PR.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                       M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                               15


   These results clearly show the advantage of using the PR strategy over the FR restriction: when PR quantity is not fixed (q
free) the average total distance reduces by 1.64% in the instances for which the numbers of vehicles used with FR and PR
schemes are same. On the other hand, the reductions are 0.80%, 0.91%, and 0.73% if PR is performed at the level of q = 0.3,
q = 0.4, and q = 0.5, respectively. In addition, we observe that solutions with one less vehicle are found in nine instances when
q is free while the same situation occurs in six instances for q = 0.3 and in three instances for q = 0.4 and q = 0.5. The
improved numbers are shown in bold. Moreover, we see PR has more potential for saving from the number of vehicles in
type-1 problems, which is an expected outcome since those problems are more restrictive due to narrow time-windows
and shorter route durations. Due to the same fact, we also observe that the average distances improve significantly in
type-1 instances, c1 problem set in particular. When q is free the average improvement in total distance is 2.89% in type-
1 problems whereas the average improvement in type-2 problems is only 0.66%.
   Not surprisingly ALNS using the variable PR amount has a better performance compared to ALNS with constant PR.
On the other hand, its average computation time is 9.7% longer compared to the case when q = 0.3 (16.77 min vs.
15.29 min). The difference in run time is particularly significant in r2 and rc2 problems where ALNS with variable PR takes
25.1% and 10.3% more time, respectively. Since the time-windows are wider and routes are longer in these problem types,
ALNS needs more time to evaluate the insertions and determine the recharge quantity. Nevertheless, the additional time
brings substantial improvements both in the number of vehicles and total distance traveled. Overall, these results suggest
the PR scheme is effective, particularly in cases where the time windows are more restrictive.


6. Conclusions and future research

    In this paper, we investigated the partial recharge strategies for the EVRPTW, namely EVRPTW-PR, and proposed an ALNS
algorithm to solve it. Some of the existing ALNS mechanisms were adopted from the literature whereas new removal and
insertion mechanisms specific to EVRPTW were developed to handle the visits to recharging stations and to incorporate
the PR decisions.
    We used the instances generated by Schneider et al. (2014) to validate the performance of the proposed ALNS. We first
solved the EVRPTW instances and benchmarked our results with those of reported in Schneider et al. (2014), Goeke and
Schneider (2015), and Hiermann et al. (2015). We also reported 4 new best-known solutions. For the proposed EVRPTW-
PR we solved the same instances. The results revealed that the routes can be significantly improved when PR is allowed, even
if at a pre-determined constant level.
    In this study, we only allowed PR using the same power level. The problem can be extended to a multiple recharge power
options at different speeds and costs as discussed in Felipe et al. (2014). Further research on this topic may also address the
heterogeneous fleet case. The heterogeneity within this context does not only arise from the vehicle capacities but from their
batteries as well since the cruising range of EVs and discharge/recharge durations differ depending on their battery condition
and age. Furthermore, the travel times may vary due to traffic conditions, accidents, construction, etc., which may have a
significant impact on the routing decisions due to limited driving range of the EVs. In addition, we assume that recharging
stations are always available, which may not be true in real life and there may be queues in the stations. So, variability in
both travel and recharging times arises as an interesting and challenging topic to be investigated within the stochastic
context.


Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank the guest editors and the two anonymous reviewers for their constructive and valuable
comments. This research was partially supported by The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey through the
BIDEB 2210 Program graduate scholarship to the first author and Grant #113M522 to the second author.


Appendix A. Parameter tuning

    All parameters are summarized in Table A.1 and the results of the parameter tuning procedure for solving the EVRPTW-PR
are given in Table A.2. The tuning sequence is from top to bottom. All parameters were initially set to the values given in the
‘‘Initial Value” column. We first considered ten different values for r2 shown in the first row and performed ten runs on the
six instances selected for tuning. Next, we calculated the average percentage deviation ‘Dev%’ of the average solution
achieved with that value from the best solution found in all runs. Then, we determined 0.22% as the least deviation and fixed
the value of the parameter r2 to 20, which had achieved this best average performance. We repeated this procedure for the
remaining parameters in the order given until all parameter values had been tuned. The best parameter values (the ones
yielding the minimum deviations) are indicated in bold. Note that the initial values in Table A.2 are the values we deter-
mined when we applied the parameter tuning for solving EVRPTW. We do not give the detailed setting for that case since
the tuning approach and the values considered are same.




Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
16                                            M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx


                            Table A.1
                            Notation and description of the parameters.

                              r2       Score of the better solution
                              NC       # of iterations between which adaptive weights of CR and CI algorithms are updated
                              q        Roulette wheel parameter
                              r1       Score of the best solution
                              r3       Score of the worse solution
                              /1       First Shaw parameter
                              /2       Second Shaw parameter
                              /3       Third Shaw parameter
                              /4       Fourth Shaw parameter
                              e        Cooling rate of SA
                              l        Initial temperature control parameter of SA
                              j        Worst removal determinism factor
                              g        Shaw removal determinism factor
                              nZ       Number of zones in zone removal
                              N SR     # of iterations between which SR is performed
                              NS       # of iterations between which adaptive weights of SR and SI algorithms are updated
                              mr       Route removal upper bound
                              N RR     # of iterations between which route removal algorithms are performed
                              nRR      # of consecutive iterations during which route removal algorithms are performed



Table A.2
Parameter tuning.

     Parameter                Initial value       Values tested
     r2             Value     6                   0           2           4            9            12          14       16         18           20
                    Dev%      0.30                0.27        0.25        0.28         0.27         0.28        0.25     0.25       0.28         0.22
     NC             Value     500                 50          100         150          200          250         300      350        400          450
                    Dev%      0.28                0.33        0.27        0.25         0.23         0.32        0.30     0.27       0.25         0.32
     q              Value     0.2                 0.05        0.1         0.15         0.25         0.3         0.35     0.4        0.45         0.5
                    Dev%      0.30                0.33        0.25        0.30         0.25         0.27        0.32     0.27       0.25         0.30
     r1             Value     33                  25          30          35           40           45          50
                    Dev%      0.32                0.25        0.32        0.32         0.37         0.30        0.28
     r3             Value     21                  3           6           9            12           13          15       24         27           30
                    Dev%      0.37                0.42        0.40        0.45         0.47         0.42        0.45     0.43       0.47         0.48
     /1             Value     5                   0.5         1           3            7            9           11       13         15
                    Dev%      0.55                0.55        0.60        0.55         0.58         0.63        0.57     0.65       0.63
     /2             Value     1                   0.25        3           5            7            9           11       13         15
                    Dev%      0.57                0.62        0.57        0.62         0.63         0.60        0.62     0.55       0.67
     /3             Value     13                  0.15        1           3            5            7           9        11         15
                    Dev%      0.60                0.53        0.58        0.53         0.57         0.55        0.53     0.62       0.53
     /4             Value     0.25                1           2           3            4            5           6        7          8            9
                    Dev%      0.57                0.62        0.58        0.62         0.68         0.62        0.63     0.58       0.67         0.62
     e              Value     0.9995              0.999       0.9991      0.9992       0.9993       0.9994      0.9996   0.9997     0.9998       0.9999
                    Dev%      0.48                0.57        0.48        0.43         0.53         0.38        0.42     0.48       0.42         0.42
     l              Value     0.05                0.1         0.15        0.2          0.25         0.3         0.35     0.4        0.45         0.5
                    Dev%      0.55                0.60        0.58        0.58         0.65         0.58        0.58     0.55       0.58         0.62
     j              Value     1                   2           3           4            5            6
                    Dev%      0.57                0.63        0.58        0.55         0.60         0.57
     g              Value     10                  2           4           6            8            12
                    Dev%      0.58                0.55        0.60        0.62         0.63         0.55
     nZ             Value     15                  5           7           9            11           13          19       21         25           30
                    Dev%      0.60                0.60        0.65        0.55         0.58         0.63        0.60     0.57       0.53         0.58
     N SR           Value     10                  20          30          40           50           60          70       80         90           100
                    Dev%      0.75                0.78        0.82        0.80         0.80         0.72        0.82     0.73       0.77         0.77
     NS             Value     1000                1500        2000        2500         3000         3500        4000     4500       5000         5500
                    Dev%      0.70                0.78        0.75        0.77         0.77         0.83        0.73     0.80       0.77         0.70
     mr             Value     0.4                 0.3         0.5         0.6
                    Dev%      0.58                0.57        0.67        0.65
     N RR           Value     6000                2000        2500        3000         3500         4000        4500     5000       5500         6500
                    Dev%      0.85                0.77        0.87        0.78         0.77         0.85        0.80     0.78       0.80         0.88
     nRR            Value     1000                750         1250        1500         1750         2000        2250     2500       2750         3000
                    Dev%      0.43                0.43        0.40        0.45         0.53         0.47        0.48     0.48       0.43         0.48



References

Adulyasak, Y., Cordeau, J.-F., Jans, R., 2014. Optimization-based adaptive large neighborhood search for the production routing problem. Transport. Sci. 48
   (1), 20–45.
Aksen, D., Kaya, O., Salman, S., Tüncel, Ö., 2014. An adaptive large neighborhood search algorithm for a selective and periodic inventory routing problem.
   Eur. J. Oper. Res. 239 (2), 413–426.


Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
                                            M. Keskin, B. Çatay / Transportation Research Part C xxx (2016) xxx–xxx                                          17


Artmeier, A., Haselmayr, J., Leucker, M., Sachenbacher, M., 2010. The optimal routing problem in the context of battery-powered electric vehicles. In: 2nd
    International Workshop on Constraint Reasoning and Optimization for Computational Sustainability, Bologna, Italy.
Azi, N., Gendreau, M., Potvin, J.-Y., 2014. An adaptive large neighborhood search for a vehicle routing problem with multiple routes. Comput. Oper. Res. 41,
    167–173.
Conrad, R.G., Figliozzi, M.A., 2011. The recharging vehicle routing problem. In: Doolen, T., Van Aken, E. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2011 Industrial Engineering
    Research Conference.
Demir, E., Bektasß, T., Laporte, G., 2012. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pollution-routing problem. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 223 (2), 346–
    359.
Desaulniers, G., Errico, F., Irnich, S., Schneider, M., 2014. Exact Algorithms for Electric Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows. Working Paper.
Emeç, U., Çatay, B., Bozkaya, B., 2016. An adaptive large neighborhood search for an e-grocery delivery routing problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 69, 109–125.
Erdogan, S., Miller-Hooks, E., 2012. A green vehicle routing problem. Transp. Res. Part E 48, 100–114.
Felipe, Á., Ortuño, M.T., Righini, G., Tirado, G., 2014. A heuristic approach for the green vehicle routing problem with multiple technologies and partial
    recharges. Transp. Res. Part E 71, 111–128.
Goeke, D., Schneider, M., 2015. Routing a mixed fleet of electric and conventional vehicles. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 245 (1), 81–99.
Hemmelmayr, V.C., Cordeau, J.-F., Crainic, T.G., 2012. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for two-echelon vehicle routing problems arising in
    city logistics. Comput. Oper. Res. 39 (12), 3215–3228.
Hiermann, G., Puchinger, J., Hartl, R.F., 2015. The Electric Fleet Size and Mix Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Recharging Stations. Working
    Paper.
Masson, R., Lehuédé, F., Péton, O., 2013. An adaptive large neighborhood search for the pickup and delivery problem with transfers. Transport. Sci. 47 (3),
    344–355.
Omidvar, A., Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, R., 2012. Sustainable vehicle routing: Strategies for congestion management and refueling scheduling. In: Proceedings
    of the IEEE International Energy Conference and Exhibition, Florence, Italy, pp. 1089–1094.
Pisinger, D., Ropke, S., 2007. A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Comput. Oper. Res. 34 (8), 2403–2435.
Qu, Y., Bard, J.F., 2012. A GRASP with adaptive large neighborhood search for pickup and delivery problems with transshipment. Comput. Oper. Res. 39 (10),
    2439–2456.
Ribeiro, G.M., Laporte, G., 2012. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the cumulative capacitated vehicle routing problem. Comput. Oper. Res.
    39 (3), 728–735.
Ropke, S., Pisinger, D., 2006a. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transport. Sci. 40
    (4), 455–472.
Ropke, S., Pisinger, D., 2006b. A unified heuristic for a large class of vehicle routing problems with backhauls. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 171 (3), 750–775.
Schneider, M., Stenger, A., Goeke, D., 2014. The electric vehicle routing problem with time windows and recharging stations. Transport. Sci. 48 (4), 500–520.
Shaw, P., 1998. Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve vehicle routing problems. In: Proceedings of the 4th International
    Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming, Springer, New York, pp. 417–431.
Solomon, M.M., 1987. Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time window constraints. Oper. Res. 35 (2), 254–265.
Touati-Moungla, N., Jost, V., 2012. Combinatorial optimization for electric vehicles management. J. Energy Power Eng. 6 (5), 738–743.
Wang, H., Shen, J., 2007. Heuristic approaches for solving transit vehicle scheduling problem with route and fueling time constraints. Appl. Math. Comput.
    190, 1237–1249.
Wang, H., Cheu, R.L., 2012. Operations of a taxi fleet for advance reservations using electric vehicles and charging stations. J. Transport. Res. Board 2352, 1–
    10.
Worley, O., Klabjan, D., 2012. Simultaneous vehicle routing and charging station siting for commercial electric vehicles. In: IEEE International Electric
    Vehicle Conference, Greenville, SC, pp. 1–3.




Please cite this article in press as: Keskin, M., Çatay, B. Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time win-
dows. Transport. Res. Part C (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013
