                                                          Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255



                                                            Contents lists available at ScienceDirect


                                                   Transportation Research Part B
                                                       journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trb




The electric vehicle routing problem with energy
consumption uncertainty
Samuel Pelletier a,∗, Ola Jabali b, Gilbert Laporte a
a
    HEC Montréal, 3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montreal H3T 2A7, Canada
b
    Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milano 20133, Italy




a r t i c l e              i n f o                          a b s t r a c t

Article history:                                            Compared with conventional freight vehicles, electric freight vehicles create less local pol-
Received 7 January 2019                                     lution and are thus generally perceived as a more sustainable means of goods distribu-
Revised 12 June 2019
                                                            tion. In urban areas, such vehicles must often perform the entirety of their delivery routes
Accepted 17 June 2019
                                                            without recharging. However, their energy consumption is subject to a fair amount of un-
Available online 25 June 2019
                                                            certainty, which is due to exogenous factors such as the weather and road conditions, en-
Keywords:                                                   dogenous factors such as driver behaviour, and several energy consumption parameters
Electric vehicle routing                                    that are diﬃcult to measure precisely. Hence we propose a robust optimization framework
Robust optimization                                         to take into account these energy consumption uncertainties in the context of an electric
City logistics                                              vehicle routing problem. The objective is to determine minimum cost delivery routes ca-
Metaheuristics                                              pable of providing strong guarantees that a given vehicle will not run out of charge during
                                                            its route. We formulate the problem as a robust mixed integer linear program and solve
                                                            small instances to optimality using robust optimization techniques. Furthermore, we de-
                                                            velop a two-phase heuristic method based on large neighbourhood search to solve larger
                                                            instances of the problem, and we conduct several numerical tests to assess the quality of
                                                            the methodology. The computational experiments illustrate the trade-off between cost and
                                                            risk, and demonstrate the inﬂuence of several parameters on best found solutions. Fur-
                                                            thermore, our heuristic identiﬁes 42 new best solutions when tested on instances of the
                                                            closely related robust capacitated vehicle routing problem.
                                                                                                                         © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.




1. Introduction

    There currently exists a strong interest on the part of the transportation science community in the design of distri-
bution schemes that may reduce the environmental impact of goods distribution, namely in the context of city logistics.
Whereas some researchers have focused on taking emission costs into account when routing conventional vehicles (e.g.,
Jabali et al., 2012; Bektaş and Laporte, 2011), others have dealt with the challenges arising from the use of cleaner alterna-
tives such as electric freight vehicles (EFVs) (Pelletier et al., 2016). Indeed, EFVs create less local air pollution and less noise
than conventional vehicles, and are therefore considered to be a more sustainable means of goods distribution. Despite
the environmental beneﬁts of EFVs, there exist signiﬁcant issues associated with their integration into goods distribution
schemes, most notably their high initial investments, limited range and payload, long recharging times, and the scarcity of
public charging stations. In an urban environment, however, delivery routes tend to be shorter than the range of currently

    ∗
        Corresponding author.
        E-mail addresses: samuel.pelletier@hec.ca (S. Pelletier), ola.jabali@polimi.it (O. Jabali), gilbert.laporte@hec.ca (G. Laporte).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2019.06.006
0191-2615/© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
226                          S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


available EFVs (Feng and Figliozzi, 2013), which means that some of the aforementioned issues, namely those concerning
recharging times and public charging infrastructures, can be averted by recharging the batteries at a central depot. Indeed,
companies that use EFVs for goods distribution will usually charge them on company grounds overnight and will rarely use
public charging stations (Naberezhnykh et al., 2012; NSR, 2013; Quak et al., 2017; Morganti and Browne, 2018). This prac-
tice also mitigates cargo security concerns and avoids ineﬃcient use of drivers’ time during en route charging. Furthermore,
depot charging offers the possibility of beneﬁting from lower energy costs through commercial off-peak electricity rates at
the depot (Pelletier et al., 2018).
    In the case of exclusive charging EFVs at the depot, vehicle routes must be planned carefully as a result of the limited
range of the vehicles, and in a way that ensures that the vehicles will be able to perform their full route with their departing
battery charge. This is particularly important in the presence of strong uncertainties surrounding the energy consumption
of the vehicles along the planned routes. Indeed, Asamer et al. (2016) show that several parameters of the comprehensive
emissions model of Barth et al. (2005) commonly used to estimate energy consumption in electric vehicle routing problems
(EVRPs) are diﬃcult to measure or depend on uncontrolable exogenous factors, and it is therefore wiser to think of their
value as lying within an uncertainty range. Yi and Bauer (2017) also demonstrate how environmental factors such as wind
speed, weather, road surface conditions, and temperature can signiﬁcantly alter the achievable range of electric vehicles.
Bingham et al. (2012) reach similar conclusions concerning the inﬂuence of driver behaviour, and note that driving less
aggressively (e.g., with fewer acceleration phases) can yield substantial energy consumption savings.
    The scientiﬁc aim of this paper is to introduce, model and solve a practical transportation problem in which EFVs must be
optimally routed with strong guarantees that they never get stranded along their routes regardless of the realization of en-
ergy consumption uncertainties. We refer to this problem as the electric vehicle routing problem with energy consumption
uncertainty (EVRP-ECU) and solve it by means of a robust optimization framework. With this goal in mind, Section 2 pro-
vides a short review of the literature related to goods distribution with electric vehicles and robust vehicle routing problems.
Section 3 describes the EVRP-ECU and presents its mathematical formulation. Section 4 details two robust optimization ap-
proaches that can be used to solve small instances of the problem to optimality. Section 5 presents a two-phase heuristic
method for larger instances in which candidate routes are generated via a ﬁrst phase based on large neighbourhood search
(LNS) and are then assembled via a set partitioning (SP) formulation in the second phase. Section 6 provides the results of
extensive computational experiments. Finally, Section 7 presents our conclusions.


2. Related literature

    Several new routing problems associated with the use of EFVs have been studied since 2010 in order to ease their
integration into distribution operations (e.g., Conrad and Figliozzi, 2011; Preis et al., 2014; Schneider et al., 2014; Felipe
et al., 2014; Goeke and Schneider, 2015; Montoya et al., 2017; Schiffer and Walther, 2017; Hiermann et al., 2016, 2019).
The generic objective in these problems is to use a ﬂeet of EFVs to deliver goods to a set of customers at minimal cost.
A recurring feature of the proposed models is that the vehicles can stop at charging stations along their delivery routes to
recharge their batteries if needed, thus distinguishing these problems from conventional vehicle routing problems (VRPs) for
which the planning of intraroute refueling stops is rarely required. Indeed, many fuel stations are available for conventional
vehicles and refueling times are negligible regardless of the fuel station, whereas for EFVs the recharging infrastructure is
scarce and recharging times are longer and can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the type of recharging station. Although en
route recharging is rarely needed in urban delivery routes, such studies remain relevant since they could facilitate the use
of EFVs outside urban environments (e.g., for mid- and long-haul goods distribution).
    In addition, because of the limited battery capacity and the resulting shorter achievable range of EFVs, such routing prob-
lems require solution methods that can accurately monitor the vehicles’ energy consumption in order to ensure they never
get stranded. Some studies assume that the battery discharges itself at a linear rate with respect to distance (e.g., Felipe
et al., 2014; Schneider et al., 2014; Hiermann et al., 2016). Others have considered a more detailed energy consumption
model based on the comprehensive emissions model of Barth et al. (2005) which computes the required energy to traverse
any given arc based on certain vehicle and arc characteristics (e.g., speed, acceleration, mass, elevation, frontal area, rolling
friction, air drag). This energy consumption model was ﬁrst applied in a VRP setting for the pollution-routing problem to
estimate fuel consumption and emissions (Bektaş and Laporte, 2011), and subsequently in many EVRP studies to track the
state of charge of the vehicles’ batteries (e.g., Preis et al., 2014; Goeke and Schneider, 2015; Lebeau et al., 2015).
    Many existing studies have also considered stochastic variants of the VRP in which the objective is to minimize the total
expected cost. The problem inputs that are assumed to be uncertain in such problems are usually customer demands, travel
and service times, or customer presence, and these uncertainties are generally handled via a priori optimization or through
the reoptimization modeling paradigm (Gendreau et al., 2016). The issue of uncertain energy consumption has not yet been
studied in VRP settings due to the ease with which intraroute refueling stops for conventional vehicles can be incorporated
in a solution.
    Robust optimization is a methodology that has increased in popularity in the last two decades, as witnessed by the grow-
ing number of publications on this topic. The main beneﬁt of robust optimization lies in its ability to incorporate uncertainty
into a problem in a relatively tractable way. This is typically achieved by deﬁning uncertainty sets containing realizations
of the uncertain parameters. Moreover, strong probabilistic guarantees can often be attained with very limited information
                              S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255            227


regarding the underlying distribution of the uncertain parameters, while still achieving less conservative solutions than by
working with worst-case values (Ben-Tal et al., 2009).
   To the best of our knowledge, only (Fontana, 2013) has considered the uncertainty surrounding the energy consump-
tion of electric vehicles and has modeled the problem within a robust optimization framework. However, this author
considers the idea of uncertainty surrounding the energy consumption of electric vehicles in an optimal path prob-
lem setting, while we extend it to a VRP setting in which the vehicle loads inﬂuence energy consumption. Schiffer and
Walther (2018) have also used a robust optimization framework in an EVRP context, but their work considers the prob-
lem of simultaneously routing EFVs and locating charging stations to be used en route in the presence of uncertain
customer locations, demand, and service time windows. Examples of other studies on robust VRPs include the work of
Sungur et al. (2008), Gounaris et al. (2013) and Gounaris et al. (2016) on the capacitated VRP with demand uncertainty;
the work of Agra et al. (2013) and Braaten et al. (2017) on the VRP with time windows and travel time uncertainty; the
work of Hu et al. (2018) on the VRP with time windows and both demand and travel time uncertainties; and the work of
Lee et al. (2012) on the VRP with deadlines, as well as demand and travel time uncertainties.
   In summary, the main contributions of this study are to model and solve a practical problem resulting from the fact
that EFVs must be able to perform their full delivery routes in urban areas with their departing battery charge, despite
uncertainties surrounding their energy consumption. We believe that this paper constitutes a valuable complement to the
existing EVRP studies on the design of routes that incorporate en route recharging. We note that such studies relate to
the use of EFVs for mid- and long-haul goods distribution, while our objective is to support the use of EFVs for urban
operations speciﬁcally. This paper is indeed the ﬁrst to consider the important issue of uncertain energy consumption in
an EVRP setting without en route recharging. We use a robust optimization approach to take into account such energy
consumption uncertainties (both exact and heuristic solution methods are proposed), and we conduct extensive numerical
tests to demonstrate the quality of our methodology. We therefore believe that this study successfully deals with a key
challenge arising from the use of EFVs as a more sustainable means of goods distribution, which should be of interest to
both transportation scientists and ﬂeet managers.

3. The electric vehicle routing problem with energy consumption uncertainty

   The objective of this section is to formally introduce the EVRP-ECU. The section is organized as follows. We ﬁrst provide
a general description of the EVRP-ECU in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2 we elaborate on how the expected values for the arcs’
uncertain energy consumption parameters can be approximated. Section 3.3 provides comments on the incorporation of
the uncertainty surrounding those energy consumption parameters. The mathematical formulation of the EVRP-ECU is then
given in Section 3.4, and ﬁnally we present in Section 3.5 the uncertainty sets that we use in our computational experiments.

3.1. Problem description

    The EVRP-ECU is deﬁned on a complete directed graph G = (N, A ). The node set N is partitioned into {N0 , {0}}, where N0
is the set of n customers, and node 0 is the depot. The set of arcs is denoted by A. We denote by K the set of homogeneous
EFVs that must be used to visit the customers. Each vehicle has a load capacity L (kg) and a battery capacity Q (kWh). Each
node i has a demand qi (kg), with qi > 0 for i ∈ N0 and q0 = 0.
    Each arc (i, j) is assigned a length dij (m), an expected empty-vehicle energy consumption aij (kWh), and an expected
load-dependent energy consumption bij (kWh/kg). We assume that the realized empty-vehicle and load-dependent energy
consumption values along the arcs will deviate from the expected ones due to the uncertainty surrounding several param-
eters in the underlying energy consumption model used to estimate aij and bij . This will be explained in more detail in
Section 3.3. A ﬁxed cost of cF is incurred for dispatching a vehicle, representing the daily salary of a driver. Parameters cE
and cM represent energy ($/kWh) and maintenance ($/m) costs, respectively.
    The following decision variables are required for the formulation of the EVRP-ECU. Binary variables xijk take value 1 if and
only if vehicle k travels on arc (i, j). Variables fijk refer to the load (kg) carried on arc (i, j) by vehicle k. Variables wk refer to
the worst-case energy consumption (kWh) that could occur for vehicle k out of all energy consumption realizations in the
uncertainty set Uk (which will be formally deﬁned in Section 3.3). We assume that the uncertainty sets Uk are calibrated so
as to ensure a probability of at most β that the realized energy consumption of vehicle k will be larger than wk (with β
chosen by the decision maker). For example, if parameter β is set to 0.01 and variable wk is assigned a value of 40 kWh in an
optimal solution to the EVRP-ECU for some vehicle k, then the probability that the delivery route of vehicle k will consume
more than 40 kWh will be at most 1%. The objective of the EVRP-ECU is to determine a set of routes that minimizes the sum
of ﬁxed, maintenance and worst-case energy costs. Furthermore, each customer demand is satisﬁed by exactly one vehicle,
routes start and end at the depot, and total route loads are at most L. Finally, the worst-case energy consumption wk of each
vehicle is at most Q (i.e., the probability that vehicle k can complete its route without getting stranded is at least 1 − β ).

3.2. Estimating the expected values of the arcs’ uncertain energy consumption parameters

   The expected values aij and bij for the arcs’ energy consumption parameters can be approximated using a two-phase
approach similar to those discussed by Goeke and Schneider (2015) and Basso et al. (2019). Acknowledging that an arc (i,
228                                        S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


j) in a VRP graph typically represents a precomputed shortest path between nodes i and j on a more detailed road graph,
the idea is to ﬁrst compute such shortest paths in the road graph, and then determine values representing the expected
empty-vehicle and load-dependent energy consumption of a vehicle traveling that path. First assume that each vehicle in
K has a curb mass w (kg), a frontal area A (m2 ), an air drag coeﬃcient Cd , and an auxiliary power demand P (W). Let
R = (NR , AR ) be a directed graph representing the underlying road graph in which the shortest paths representing the arcs
in G are computed. The nodes in set NR can be assumed to be road intersections, and the arcs in set AR can be assumed to
be road segments. Then if a road segment (l, m) ∈ AR (i.e., a road section between intersections l ∈ NR and m ∈ NR ) is traveled
at constant speed vlm (m/s) by a vehicle in K, then the amount of mechanical energy elm (kWh) required for that vehicle to
travel that road segment with a load f is computed with the longitudinal dynamics model from Asamer et al. (2016), which
estimates energy consumption in a similar way to the comprehensive emissions model of Barth et al. (2005):
                    1                                                                       
      elm =                 (w + f )gdlm sin θlm + (w + f )gCr dlm cos θlm + 0.5ACd ρv2lm dlm ,                                                                    (1)
                3.6 · 106
where g is the gravitational constant, ρ is the air density (kg/m3 ), Cr is the rolling friction coeﬃcient, and dlm and θ lm are
the length (m) and road angle (rad) of the road segment (l, m). With a travel time of tlm = vlm /dlm associated with road
segment (l, m) and assuming the vehicles have a total drivetrain eﬃciency of φ , the amount of energy Blm (kWh) required
from the battery on road segment (l, m) is then
                
                    φ · elm + 3.61·106 · P · tlm , if elm ≥ 0
      Blm =            1
                                                                                                                                                                   (2)
                    3.6·106
                            · P · tlm                     if elm < 0.
   Although electric vehicles can sometimes recharge their battery when braking and driving downhill by using the electric
motor as a generator, for sake of simplicity we do not consider energy recuperation in this study. This also makes the
EVRP-ECU solution even more protected against energy consumption uncertainties (i.e., if the vehicle ends up occasionally
recuperating some energy while performing its route, the solution becomes even more robust).
   Note that acceleration can also be incorporated into the estimation of elm if necessary. We ﬁrst show how this can be
done for the simple case of constant acceleration throughout an entire road segment, and we then illustrate how this simple
case can be used to establish more involved structures of elm . If road segment (l, m) is traveled by starting at time t = 0 at
an initial speed of vI and accelerating or decelerating at a constant acceleration a during the entire road segment, then a
speed of
                
      vlm =         v2I + 2adlm                                                                                                                                    (3)
will be reached at the end of the road segment at time
                  2dlm
      tlm =                   .                                                                                                                                    (4)
               vI + vlm
In this case, the amount of mechanical energy elm (kWh) required for vehicle k ∈ K to travel that road segment with a load
of f becomes
                                                                                                                        tlm                           
                    1
      elm =                           (w + f )α adlm + (w + f )gdlm sin θlm + (w + f )gCr dlm cos θlm +                         0.5ACd ρ (vI + at )3 dt ,          (5)
                3.6 · 106                                                                                                 0

where α is a mass factor greater than one to account for the rotational inertia of the vehicle’s moving parts (Asamer et al.,
2016). The integral in the last term can be developed to yield
                                                                                                                                                            
                1                                                                                                                               v2lm − v2I
      elm =                           (w + f )α adlm + (w + f )gdlm sin θlm + (w + f )gCr dlm cos θlm + 0.5ACd ρ dlm (v                   2
                                                                                                                                          I +                ) .   (6)
            3.6 · 106                                                                                                                               2
    Eqs. (4) –(6) can then be used in (2) to compute Blm . Finally, if road segment (l, m) is traveled by starting at an initial
speed vI at time t = 0, accelerating at a constant rate a+ until reaching a speed of vlm , traveling at a constant speed vlm for
a certain period of time and then decelerating at a constant rate a− to reach a speed vF at time t = tlm , then the distance
and time traveled in each phase (i.e., acceleration, constant speed, and deceleration) can be computed through Eqs. (3) and
(4), respectively. Eqs. (1) and (6) can then be used to determine the required mechanical energy during each phase. Each of
these values can subsequently be used in (2) to compute the amount of energy required by the battery during each phase.
    Regardless of the case, the ﬁnal equation for Blm will always be linear in f. We derive alm and blm so that Blm = alm +
blm · f . Thus, once a shortest path Sij has been found for each arc (i, j) ∈ A, we can aggregate the road segment energy
consumption parameters of each path to determine the net expected values for the empty-vehicle and load-dependent
energy consumption of the ﬂeet vehicles when traveling arc (i, j):

      ai j =                 alm       ∀(i, j ) ∈ A                                                                                                                (7)
               (l,m )∈Si j

      bi j =                 blm       ∀(i, j ) ∈ A.                                                                                                               (8)
               (l,m )∈Si j
                                                S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255    229


3.3. Incorporating uncertainty

       An issue associated with the values aij and bij describing the expected energy consumption on arc (i, j) is of course that
several uncertain parameters are needed to estimate them. As discussed by Asamer et al. (2016) and Yi and Bauer (2017),
many parameters in the energy consumption model used in the previous section may vary according to some operating
conditions, or are diﬃcult to measure precisely. For example, the rolling friction coeﬃcient Cr is diﬃcult to measure and
depends on the road surface, the tires, the travel speed, and even the temperature. The air drag coeﬃcient Cd may vary
depending on vehicle shape, opened windows, wind speed, and the vehicle’s angle of attack. The air density ρ depends
on factors such as temperature, atmospheric pressure, and humidity. The drivetrain eﬃciency φ can vary with speed and
power. The auxiliary power P depends on driver behaviour and environmental conditions (air conditioning, heating, light,
radio). Moreover, driver behaviour and external factors such as traﬃc conditions may inﬂuence the vehicle’s travel speed
and acceleration cycle. Therefore, even if we compute aij and bij with expected values for all these uncertain parameters, it
is likely that the realized empty-vehicle and load-dependent energy consumption along some arcs will deviate from aij and
bij for each vehicle.
       To deal with these uncertainties, we derive a robust optimization model by integrating uncertainty on how much the
realized energy consumption of a given vehicle k on each arc in A will deviate from its expected value through uncertainty
set Uk . Hence we assume that the maximum deviations aˆi j ≥ 0 and bˆ i j ≥ 0 from aij and bij , respectively, are known. For
example, the methodology described in Section 3.2 could be applied with worst-case values for the uncertain parameters
mentioned in the previous paragraph to estimate aˆi j and ˆbi j . Asamer et al. (2016) report worst-case values for some of the
uncertain parameters in the energy consumption model (e.g., Cr , Cd , ρ , φ , P), based on the literature and on measurements
from an electric vehicle. Uncertainty ranges for speed and acceleration can then be estimated on the basis of the road graph
and of the driver’s behaviour, which can further be used with worst-case values of Cr , Cd , ρ , φ , and P to determine aˆi j and
ˆbi j . Of course, historical data can also be used to determine aˆi j and ˆbi j when available.
     Let Zk ∈ R|A| be a random vector with known support [−1, 1] representing the deviation of vehicle k’s empty-vehicle
and load-dependent energy consumption along each arc from their expected values. Once we pick a solution to the EVRP-
ECU (i.e., in terms of the variables xijk , fijk and wk ), we assume an adversary can select any ζ k ∈ Uk to make vehicle k’s
route energy-infeasible, where ζ k is a realization of Zk . A given element ζ k ∈ Uk thus provides a ζ ijk value that sets the
realized empty-vehicle and load-dependent energy consumption parameters for vehicle k along arc (i, j) as ai j + aˆi j · ζi jk and
bi j + bˆ i j · ζ , respectively. The idea is to choose and calibrate sets Uk so as to achieve the desired protection level β by
             i jk
covering enough realizations of the random vectors Zk . We will use sets Uk to approximate the following chance constraint
for each vehicle in the mathematical formulation of Section 3.4:

      P                   ai j · xi jk + bi j · fi jk + (aˆi j · xi jk + bˆ i j · fi jk ) · Zi jk ≤ wk            ≥ 1 − β.                    (9)
             (i, j )∈A

We assume that the expected values aij and bij as well as the maximum deviations aˆi j and bˆ i j are the same for each vehicle
for a given arc (i, j), and hence we do not index them by vehicle.

3.4. Mathematical formulation

   The EVRP-ECU is formulated as the following robust mixed integer optimization model:

      minimize                            cF · x0 jk +                     cM · di j · xi jk +         cE · w k                              (10)
                              k∈K j∈N0                     k∈K (i, j )∈A                         k∈K
subject to

             x0 jk ≤ 1             k∈K                                                                                                       (11)
      j∈N0

                         xi jk = 1         i ∈ N0                                                                                            (12)
      k∈K j∈N\{i}

                    x jik =             xi jk       i ∈ N, k ∈ K                                                                             (13)
      j∈N\{i}                 j∈N\{i}

      q j · xi jk ≤ fi jk ≤ (L − qi ) · xi jk                (i, j ) ∈ A, k ∈ K                                                              (14)

                         f jik −                    fi jk = qi      i ∈ N0                                                                   (15)
      k∈K j∈N\{i}                  k∈K j∈N\{i}

                     (ai j + aˆi j · ζi jk ) · xi jk + (bi j + ˆbi j · ζi jk ) · fi jk ≤ wk              k ∈ K, ζk ∈ Uk                      (16)
      (i, j )∈A
      0 ≤ wk ≤ Q                   k∈K                                                                                                       (17)
      xi jk ∈ {0, 1}               (i, j ) ∈ A, k ∈ K.                                                                                       (18)
230                               S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


    The objective function (10) minimizes total ﬁxed, maintenance and worst-case energy costs. Constraints (11) ensure that
each vehicle is dispatched at most once. Constraints (12) force each customer node to be visited exactly once. Constraints
(13) are ﬂow conservation equations. Constraints (14) ensure that the load capacity is respected, that a load can only be
carried along an arc if a vehicle travels that arc, and bound that load appropriately for each arc. Constraints (15) state that
the incoming load minus the outgoing load for each customer node must be equal to its demand. These constraints also
serve as subtour elimination constraints. Constraints (16) are used to determine the worst-case total energy consumption
wk that could occur for vehicle k out of all possible scenarios in the uncertainty set Uk , which is assumed to have been
calibrated to approximate the chance constraint (9). Constraints (17) ensure that the worst-case energy consumption of
each vehicle is at most the battery capacity Q. Finally, constraints (18) deﬁne the domain of the xijk variables.
    Note that once the problem is solved, even if the optimal values for the wk variables are much smaller than Q, the
information they provide can still be useful from both a depot scheduling and a battery degradation perspective. Indeed,
frequently charging a battery to a high level (and keeping it at this level for a lengthy period) can shorten its expected
lifespan (see, e.g., Lunz et al., 2012). Hence companies using EFVs should ideally try to charge the minimum required for
their operations, and do this as closely as possible to the vehicles’ departure times (Pelletier et al., 2017). This is especially
true considering that having to replace the battery of EFVs over the course of their lifetime has been shown to signiﬁcantly
impact their business case (Davis and Figliozzi, 2013; Feng and Figliozzi, 2013; Lee et al., 2013). The EVRP-ECU can thus
provide valuable information regarding the smallest “safe” amount of energy to recharge in each vehicle. Moreover, when
charging is only performed at the depot, full charges may not be possible nor optimal because of time-dependent energy
costs, demand charges, battery degradation, depot charging infrastructures or multi-shift operational contexts (Pelletier et al.,
2018). The information given by the solution to the EVRP-ECU can thus also help plan the depot charging activities by
knowing the smallest departing battery level wk required for each vehicle.

3.5. Uncertainty sets

    As mentioned in Section 3.3, the uncertainty sets Uk used in constraints (16) are assumed to be designed so as to ensure
a probability at most equal to β that the real energy consumption of vehicle k be larger than wk , i.e., we want to approx-
imate chance constraint (9) for each vehicle through constraints (16). It is ultimately up to the decision maker to choose
and calibrate the uncertainty sets based on what is known about the random vectors Zk so as to reach the desired trade-
off between cost and risk. In what follows we present ﬁve uncertainty sets to illustrate how different alternatives can be
considered depending on the desired protection level and on the assumptions made about the distribution of the uncertain
parameters. For example, in order to have a zero probability that the real energy consumption of vehicle k will be larger
than wk , one could use the entire support of random vector Zk through the following box uncertainty set (Ben-Tal et al.,
2009):
      Uk1 = {ζk ∈ R|A| | −1 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1 ∀(i, j ) ∈ A},                                                                             (19)

which is equivalent to solving the problem with the worst-case energy parameter values (ai j + aˆi j ) and (bi j + bˆ i j ) for each
arc. However, one does not expect the worst-case value to occur on every arc simultaneously, and cost savings may be
achievable by being less conservative but still ensuring that the real energy consumption of vehicle k is almost never larger
than wk . Budgeted uncertainty sets calibrated through parameter  could therefore be used (Ben-Tal et al., 2009):

      Uk2 = {ζk ∈ R|A| | −1 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1 ∀(i, j ) ∈ A,                     |ζi jk | ≤  },                                          (20)
                                                              (i, j )∈A

thereby only allowing up to  arcs to deviate from their expected energy consumption values on each route in order to
render that route energy-infeasible. There also exist studies (e.g., Poss, 2013) that show how allowing the size of the un-
certainty set to depend on the number of non-zero decisions in combinatorial problems can often yield less conservative
solutions while providing the same probabilistic guarantees. Hence one may consider route-dependent budgeted uncertainty
sets calibrated with parameters θ 0 and θ :
                                                                                                                    
      Uk3 =       ζk   ∈ R|A| | −1 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1   ∀(i, j ) ∈ A,               |ζi jk | ≤ θ0 + θ               xi jk       ∀k ∈ K,   (21)
                                                                 (i, j )∈A                       (i, j )∈A

where the budget of uncertainty that can affect vehicle k now depends on the length of the route. Hu et al. (2018) have
proposed similar route-dependent uncertainty sets. Another option to prevent all parameters from taking their worst-case
value simultaneously may be to use the
                                                                      
      Uk4 =       ζk ∈ R|A| | −1 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1 ∀(i, j ) ∈ A, ||ζk ||2 ≤ γ .                                                          (22)
     If all that is known about Zk is that it is symmetrically distributed on the interval [−1, 1] and that its components are
independent, then any of the sets Uk2 , Uk3 or Uk4 can be calibrated to approximate (9) (see, e.g., Ben-Tal et al., 2009; Poss,
2013). There also exist some uncertainty sets that can be used to account for the correlation between the components of
Zk , which may be relevant for the EVRP-ECU considering that driver behaviour and external conditions like the weather and
road conditions should not differ too much along a given route. For example, ellipsoidal uncertainty sets deﬁned by the
                                                  S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255    231


following can be useful if all that is known about Zk is that it is distributed with a mean of zero and a covariance matrix

   ∈ R | A |× | A | :
                                                                       
         Uk5 =           ζk ∈ R|A| |           ζkT           −1    ζk ≤ r ,                                                                    (23)

where the parameter r determines the cardinality of the set and can hence be chosen according to the desired level of
protection and any additional assumptions on the distribution of Zk , e.g., normal or arbitrary (El Ghaoui et al., 2003). A few
other uncertainty sets that can be used to deal with the correlation among the components of Zk can be found in Bandi and
Bertsimas (2012), Yuan et al. (2016), Jalilvand-Nejad et al. (2016) and Gounaris et al. (2013, 2016). Some ideas on how to
construct uncertainty sets in the presence of historical data are also discussed in Bertsimas et al. (2018). In Section 6, we
conduct numerical tests with each of the above uncertainty sets except Uk2 , since it can be viewed as a special case of Uk3
with θ = 0.

4. Exact methods

    Non-discrete uncertainty sets such as those presented in Section 3.5 amount to having an inﬁnite number of constraints
(16) in the robust optimization model, thus rendering the model intractable for commercial solvers, even for small instances.
We have therefore implemented robust optimization techniques in order to solve small instances of the problem to optimal-
ity. These include (1) reformulating the model of Section 3.4 so as to obtain a tractable deterministic mixed integer linear
program in the case of polyhedral uncertainty sets, and (2) using a cutting-plane method. In what follows we brieﬂy present
these methods. Their results will be used to evaluate the performance of the metaheuristic presented in Section 5.

4.1. Reformulation

   If the uncertainty set is polyhedral, then the model of Section 3.4 can be reformulated to yield a tractable deterministic
mixed integer linear program. We illustrate this with the budgeted uncertainty sets Uk2 and Uk3 . First, because we assume
that aˆi j , bˆ i j ≥ 0 ∀(i, j ) ∈ A, it is never beneﬁcial for the adversary to set ζ ijk < 0 for an arc. Hence we can reformulate sets
Uk2 and Uk3 by setting 0 ≤ ζ ijk ≤ 1 instead of −1 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1, and by dropping the absolute value in the sums.
    In the case of the route-independent budgeted sets Uk2 , for a given solution of the EVRP-ECU (i.e., for ﬁxed variables)
we can check whether constraints (16) are satisﬁed for vehicle k by verifying whether the optimal solution value of the
                                              
following linear program is at most wk − (i, j )∈A (ai j · xi jk + bi j · fi jk ):

         maximize                             aˆi j · xi jk + ˆbi j · fi jk · ζi jk                                                            (24)
                                  (i, j )∈A

         subject to
                                      ζi jk ≤                                                                                                 (25)
                          (i, j )∈A

         0 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1                   (i, j ) ∈ A.                                                                                          (26)
The dual of the above linear program can be written with variables λk and σ ijk as

         minimize                 · λk +                  σi jk                                                                               (27)
                                               (i, j )∈A

         subject to
                          λk + σi jk ≥ aˆi j · xi jk + ˆbi j · fi jk          (i, j ) ∈ A                                                      (28)

         λk ≥ 0                                                                                                                                (29)

         σi jk ≥ 0             (i, j ) ∈ A.                                                                                                    (30)
   Hence we obtain a tractable deterministic mixed integer linear programming formulation of the EVRP-ECU by replacing
constraints (16) in the model of Section 3.4 with
                                                                   
                         ai j · xi jk + bi j · fi jk + σi jk +  · λk ≤ wk              k ∈ K,                                                 (31)
         (i, j )∈A
                                                                                                                   
and by adding constraints (28)–(30) for each vehicle k ∈ K, since duality theory ensures that  · λk + (i, j )∈A σi jk ≥
      
max {      (aˆi j · x + bˆ i j · f ) · ζ } for vehicle k as long as constraints (28)–(30) are satisﬁed. Note that λk and σ ijk are
           (i, j )∈A              i jk            i jk       i jk
ζk ∈Uk
variables in the reformulation.
232                                           S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


    In the case of the route-dependent budgeted uncertainty sets Uk3 , we would instead need to solve the following to check
if constraints (16) are satisﬁed for k in a given solution:

      maximize                             aˆi j · xi jk + bˆ i j · fi jk · ζi jk                                                          (32)
                               (i, j )∈A

      subject to
                                   ζi jk ≤ θ0 + θ                    xi jk                                                                 (33)
                       (i, j )∈A                         (i, j )∈A

      0 ≤ ζi jk ≤ 1                  (i, j ) ∈ A.                                                                                          (34)
The dual of the above linear program can once again be written with variables λk and σ ijk :
                                                                                   
      minimize                θ0 · λk +                    θ · xi jk · λk + σi jk
                                             (i, j )∈A

subject to (28)–(30).
   Constraints (16) are therefore equivalent to
                                                                    
                      (ai j + θ · λk ) · xi jk + bi j · fi jk + σi jk + θ0 · λk ≤ wk                  k∈K                                  (35)
      (i, j )∈A

      λk + σi jk ≥ aˆi j · xi jk + bˆ i j · fi jk                     k ∈ K, (i, j ) ∈ A                                                   (36)

      λk ≥ 0                k∈K                                                                                                            (37)

      σi jk ≥ 0             k ∈ K, (i, j ) ∈ A.                                                                                            (38)
   Since the xijk variables are binary, as in Poss (2013) we linearize constraints (35) by introducing real variables uijk to
represent the product of variables xijk and λk . Constraints (35) can thus be replaced with
                                                                             
                      ai j · xi jk + θ · ui jk + bi j · fi jk + σi jk + θ0 · λk ≤ wk                 k∈K                                   (39)
      (i, j )∈A

      ui jk ≥ λk − M (1 − xi jk )                   k ∈ K, (i, j ) ∈ A                                                                     (40)

      ui jk ≥ 0            k ∈ K, (i, j ) ∈ A,                                                                                             (41)
where M is a large constant. We can therefore obtain a tractable deterministic mixed integer linear programming formula-
tion of the EVRP-ECU with route-dependent budgeted uncertainty sets as well. The robust problem can also be reformulated
through duality theory as a deterministic problem in the presence of non-polyhedral uncertainty sets like those deﬁned by
Uk4 and Uk5 , but in this case the reformulation gives rise to a second-order cone problem. We therefore present a cutting
plane method for these cases in the next section.

4.2. Cutting-plane method

    An alternative to reformulating the robust optimization model is to initiate a branch-and-cut procedure on the nominal
version of the problem (i.e., without uncertainty), and whenever an integer feasible solution is found, to verify the worst-
case energy consumption of each route and add cuts accordingly (Bertsimas et al., 2016). To this end, we need to solve the
following problem for each route k in the current integer feasible solution of the search tree:

      maximize                             ai j · xi jk + bi j · fi jk + aˆi j · xi jk + ˆbi j · fi jk · ζi jk                             (42)
                               (i, j )∈A

      subject to
                      ζk ∈ Uk ,                                                                                                            (43)
where Uk is the considered uncertainty set. Let Hk be the value of the optimal solution of (42)–(43) for the route of vehicle
k, achieved with scenario ζ k ∈ Uk . If (1) the uncertainty sets used are not route-dependent, (2) Hk is larger than the value
of variable wk in the current solution, and (3) the uncertainty sets are the same for all vehicles, then we add the following
cuts:

                      (ai j + aˆi j · ζ i jk ) · xi jl + (bi j + ˆbi j · ζ i jk ) · fi jl ≤ wl     l ∈ K,                                  (44)
      (i, j )∈A

since the realization ζ k is valid for any other route that could be assigned to any vehicle. Constraints (44) force a suﬃcient
worst-case energy consumption of Hk whenever a vehicle performs the route that vehicle k was performing in the current
                                            S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255    233


solution, thereby simultaneously forbidding the route whenever Hk > Q, due to constraints (17). If the branch-and-cut proce-
dure eventually ﬁnds an optimal solution in which all routes are robust, only a subset of constraints (16) would have been
added. The solution is therefore also optimal for the entire problem.
    However, if the uncertainty set is route-dependent, we cannot add constraints (44) since realization ζ k it is not necessar-
ily valid for other route lengths. Alternatively, we can add cuts similar to those proposed by Laporte and Louveaux (1993) for
the integer L-shaped method. Letting Rk be the set containing the arcs in the route of vehicle k and assuming once again
that the uncertainty sets are the same for each vehicle, the following cuts are added if Hk is larger than the value of variable
wk in the current solution, and the uncertainty sets are route-dependent:


      Hk ·                xi jl −                  xi jl   − Hk · (|Rk | − 1 ) ≤ wl    l ∈ K.                                            (45)
             (i, j )∈Rk             (i, j )∈/ Rk

    If Hk ≤ Q, then constraints (45) will ensure that the worst-case energy consumption of the vehicle performing route Rk be
at least Hk . If Hk > Q, then constraints (45) will ensure that no vehicle performs route Rk due to constraints (17). Note that
although this is not optimal, some feasible solutions encountered during the branch-and-cut procedure could have vehicles
returning to the depot carrying loads. Therefore, one should update the load carried along the route so as to have no
returning loads before solving (42)–(43) to obtain Hk and subsequently adding constraints (45). If not, constraints (45) could
forbid a route that would otherwise be feasible by making this correction. Finally, we mention that the method discussed
here for route-dependent uncertainty sets is also valid for those sets that are not, and that if the uncertainty sets are the
same for each vehicle, then (42)–(43) only needs to be solved the ﬁrst time a speciﬁc route is encountered in the search
tree.

5. Two-phase metaheuristic

    In order to solve large instances of the EVRP-ECU, we propose a two-phase heuristic in which a pool of candidate routes
is generated in a ﬁrst phase, and then combined via an SP formulation in the second phase. Similar two-phase methods
have been shown to be quite successful in both deterministic and stochastic routing problem settings (see, e.g., Mendoza
and Villegas, 2013; Montoya et al., 2016; Mendoza et al., 2016; Montoya et al., 2017). The ﬁrst phase uses the LNS framework
ﬁrst proposed by Shaw (1998) to construct a pool of routes, thereby destroying and repairing large portions of the solution at
each iteration to move from one area of the search space to another. Rather than forcing solutions to remain energy-feasible
during the ﬁrst phase of the procedure with respect to their routes’ worst-case energy consumption, we only ensure energy
feasibility with respect to their routes’ expected energy consumption. However, after destroying and repairing the current
solution at each iteration of the LNS in the ﬁrst phase of the method (and occasionally during and after an additional local
search phase), we check whether the resulting solution contains any new robust routes, i.e., routes with a worst-case energy
consumption that is less than the battery capacity. If so, we add them to the pool of robust routes. In the second phase,
after a number of iterations of the LNS, we solve a set partitioning problem over this pool to generate a complete robust
solution. This allows (1) to only have to evaluate the robustness of routes once moves have been implemented, rather
then when evaluating a potential move (which could signiﬁcantly increase the solution times), (2) to generate infeasible
solutions during the search in terms of energy, which can act as a diversiﬁcation mechanism, and (3) to easily adapt the
implementation of the algorithm when solving the problem with new uncertainty sets.
    In contrast to earlier LNS methods that used only one operator to remove customers and one operator to insert them,
we apply several removal and insertion operators, as in the adaptive LNS (ALNS) introduced by Ropke and Pisinger (2006).
ALNS is an extension of the LNS framework in which several destroy and repair operators compete against each other
to modify the current solution. The probabilities of selecting the different operators are dynamically updated through an
adaptive mechanism, thereby allowing operators that perform well on a given instance to be used more frequently. The
LNS heuristic we have implemented in the ﬁrst phase of our heuristic contains all the ingredients of an ALNS procedure
besides the adaptive layer. We initially implemented our method within the ALNS framework, but we observed that the
adaptive component did not improve solution quality signiﬁcantly. We therefore opted to keep the probability of selecting
each operator ﬁxed throughout the search in order to reduce the number of parameters of the algorithm.
    The main steps of our solution method are as follows. We ﬁrst build an initial solution with a simple constructive heuris-
tic (Section 5.1). Then, at each iteration, random numbers are drawn to determine which removal and insertion operators to
apply. Most of our operators are inspired by those used in Ropke and Pisinger (2006), Demir et al. (2012), and Goeke and
Schneider (2015). The selected removal operator is then applied to remove a random number of customers nr between nc
and nc , or to eliminate an entire route (Section 5.2). The removed customers are then placed in a removal list until they
are reinserted in the solution (Section 5.3). A local search (LS) phase is then performed when the repaired solution seems
promising (Section 5.4), and the resulting solution is then accepted or rejected according to the simulated annealing mech-
anism (Section 5.5). Solutions are checked for new robust routes before, after, and occasionally during the LS phase. It is
therefore important to eﬃciently compute the worst-case energy consumption of new routes (Section 5.6). We also update
the best found (if any) robust solution during the LNS phase when a solution only contains robust routes. Finally, a robust
LS is performed on the best found nominal solution (which is not necessarily robust) throughout the procedure prior to
the set partitioning phase, and on the robust solution obtained after solving the set partitioning problem (Section 5.7). The
234                               S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


best candidate between the resulting solution and the best found robust solution over the course of the LNS phase is then
chosen as the ﬁnal solution. An outline of the method is provided in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Two-phase heuristic method.
      Input: parameters ω, δ , τ , r, and κ
      Output: a robust solution XF inal
 1: Generate an initial solution XInitial with the savings algorithm
 2: Initiate temperature T according to XInitial and ω
 3: Check robustness of routes in XInitial and add all robust routes to R
 4: if All routes in XInitial are robust then
 5:     XBestRobust ← XInitial
 6: XCur ← XInitial , XBestNominal ← XInitial
 7: repeat
 8:     Select a removal operator and an insertion operator and apply them on XCur to get XTemp
 9:     Check robustness of any new routes in XTemp and add all new robust routes to R
10:     if All routes in XTemp are robust and C R (Xtemp ) < C R (XBestRobust ) then
11:         XBestRobust ← XTemp
12:     if C (XTemp ) ≤ δ · C (XBestNominal ) then
13:         if C (XTemp ) ≤ τ · C (XBestNominal ) then
14:             Perform local search on XTemp to get XNew , add all new robust routes encountered during the search
                to R , and update XBestRobust during the search
15:         else
16:             Perform local search on XTemp to get XNew and add all new robust routes in XNew to R
17:             if All routes in XNew are robust and C R (XNew ) < C R (XBestRobust ) then
18:                 XBestRobust ← XNew
19:     else
20:        XNew ← XTemp
21:     if C (XNew ) < C (XBestNominal ) then
22:         XCur ← XNew
23:         XBestNominal ← XNew
24:     else
25:         if C (XNew ) < C (XCur ) or the Random insertion was applied then
26:             XCur ← XNew
27:         else
28:             Generate a random number p ∈ [0, 1]
29:             if p ≤ exp[−(C (XNew ) − C (XCur ))/T ] then
30:                 XCur ← XNew
31:     T ←r·T
32: until κ iterations have been performed
33: Perform robust local search on XBestNominal to get XLNS/RLS and add any new robust routes encountered during the search
      to R
34: if All routes in XLNS/RLS are robust and C R (XX                  ) < C R (XBestRobust ) then
                                                            LNS/RLS
35:     XBestRobust ← XXLNS/RLS
36: Solve set partioning problem to ﬁnd a robust solution XSP
37: Perform robust local search on XSP to get the robust solution XSP/RLS
38: if XBestRobust = ∅ and C R (XBestRobust ) < C R (XSP/RLS ) then
39:     XF inal ← XBestRobust
40: else
41:     XF inal ← XSP/RLS




5.1. Initial solution construction

   In order to construct an initial solution XInitial , we apply the Clarke and Wright savings algorithm (1964). An initial solu-
tion is constructed by creating n back-and-forth routes, followed by merging, at each iteration, a route ending at customer i
with a route starting at customer j so as to maximize the distance saving si j = di0 + d0 j − di j . We only merge routes when
feasibility can be maintained with respect to capacity and expected energy consumption. The initial back-and-forth routes
are checked for robustness and added to the pool of robust routes accordingly.
                                    S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255       235


5.2. Removal operators

     We now brieﬂy describe the operators that we use in the LNS phase of our method. At the start of each iteration, one
of the following removal operators is randomly chosen to remove a certain number of customers from the current solution
XCur .
     Random removal randomly selects nr customers and removes them from the current solution.
     Worst removal assigns a value to each customer indicating the difference between the solution value with the customer
and without it. These are then stored in an ordered set S and the customer with the |S| ·  λW R th largest value is removed
from the solution (with the 0th referring to the highest value). The parameter  is randomly drawn in [0,1) according to a
continuous uniform distribution and the parameter λWR is used to randomize the removal. The procedure is reiterated until
nr customers have been removed. Note that when evaluating the difference between the solution value with a customer and
without it, the energy costs are computed with the vehicles’ expected energy consumption.
     Worst energy removal is similar to Worst removal, but the cost assigned to a customer j is given by (ai j + bi j · fi jk ) + (a jl +
b jl · f jlk ), where i and l are the nodes immediately preceding and following j in its route in the current solution. As with
Worst removal, a parameter λWE is introduced to randomize the removal.
     Worst distance removal is the same as Worst energy removal, but the cost assigned to a customer j is given by di j + d jl ,
where i and l are the nodes directly preceding and following j in its route in the current solution. The parameter λWD is
introduced to randomize the removal as with the previous two removal operators.
     Shaw removal is intended to remove customers that are similar, based on predetermined criteria. First, a customer i
is randomly selected and removed from the solution. The relatedness R(i, j) between customer i and a customer j in our
implementation is deﬁned as

                           di j                             |qi − q j |               ai j
       R(i, j ) = μ1 ·              + μ2 · s i j + μ3 ·                      + μ4 ·            ,
                         max (dlm )                     max(ql ) − min (qm )        max (alm )
                         (l,m )∈A                               l∈N0          m∈N0                  (l,m )∈A

where si j = −1 if i and j are on the same route, and si j = 1 otherwise. The customers in the solution are then stored in
S and the customer with the |S| ·  λShaw th smallest relatedness value is removed (with the 0th referring to the smallest
value). As with the previous three operators,  is randomly selected in [0,1), and λShaw is a parameter used to introduce
some randomness in the search process. The procedure is then repeated by setting i as the last removed customer until nr
customers have been removed. The parameters μ1 , μ2 , μ3 , and μ4 are used to attribute weights to similarities regarding
different (normalized) criteria. Our implementation deﬁnes the relatedness R(i, j) between customers i and j based on the
distance separating them (weight μ1 ), on whether they are in the same route or not (weight μ2 ), on the difference between
their demands (weight μ3 ), and on the expected energy consumption required for an empty vehicle to travel from i to j
(weight μ4 ).
    Node neighbourhood removal ﬁrst selects a customer i randomly and removes it from the solution. It then removes the
nr − 1 nodes closest to i.
    Random route removal randomly selects a route in the solution and removes all its customers.
    Distance-based route removal removes the longest route from the current solution.
    Energy-based route removal removes the route with the largest expected energy consumption from the current solution.


5.3. Insertion operators

   Once the removal phase is completed, one of the following insertion operators is randomly chosen to insert the removed
customers back into the partially destroyed solution. The insertion operators only ensure energy feasibility with respect
to the vehicles’ expected energy consumption, and evaluate energy costs with the vehicles’ expected energy consumption
when comparing solution values.
   Greedy insertion determines the best position where each removed customer can be inserted in the solution, and inserts
the customer whose best insertion position yields the smallest increase in the solution value. This process is then reiterated
until all removed customers have been inserted. A removed customer i can be inserted in any feasible position in an existing
route, or a new route containing only i can be created.
   Regret insertion seeks to avoid delaying the insertion of customers that could deteriorate the solution if they are not
inserted with a higher priority. A Regret-k insertion in our implementation will determine the k best insertion positions of
each removed node. Letting cik refer to the cost of the partial solution resulting from inserting i in its kth best position,
                                                                               
Regret-k insertion will insert the removed node i yielding the largest value of kj=2 (ci j − ci1 ). The LNS phase of our method
uses Regret-2 insertion and Regret-3 insertion.
   Randomized greedy insertion is similar to Greedy insertion, but the insertion costs associated with the best inser-
tion position of each removed customer are stored in S, and the customer with the |S| ·  λRG th smallest value is in-
serted into its best position. As with several of the removal operators,  is randomly selected from [0,1) and the pa-
rameter λRG is used to randomize the heuristic. The procedure is repeated until all removed customers have been
inserted.
236                          S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


   Randomized regret-2 insertion is similar to Regret-2 insertion, but instead of always inserting the removed customer i
with the largest (ci2 − ci1 ) value, the selection is randomized as in Randomized Greedy insertion, using the parameter λRR to
control the degree of randomization.
   Energy-based insertion calculates the cost of inserting a removed customer i along a route, based on the expected en-
ergy consumption of the route prior to and after inserting i in it. The operator thus determines the best possible posi-
tion where each removed node can be inserted in the partial solution based on such energy-based insertion costs, and
inserts the customer whose best insertion position results in the smallest increase of the associated route’s expected energy
consumption.


5.4. Local search

    If the solution XTemp resulting from the destroy and repair phase has a nominal cost (i.e., with energy costs computed
with the expected energy consumption of vehicles) at most equal to δ times the nominal cost of the best known nominal
solution XBestNominal , where δ > 1, an LS phase is performed following a ﬁrst-improvement strategy with respect to nominal
costs. We refer to solutions in which energy feasibility and energy costs are evaluated with respect to the vehicles’ expected
energy consumption as nominal solutions. The LS uses a composite neighbourhood of 2-Opt (intra-route moves), 2-Opt∗
(inter-route moves), Relocate (intra- and inter-route moves), and Exchange (intra- and inter-route moves). Energy feasibility
is only ensured with respect to the vehicles’ expected energy consumption during the LS.
    2-Opt removes two arcs from a route and inserts two other arcs to reconnect the remaining paths, thereby inverting the
order in which the nodes between the two removed arcs are visited. We only consider 2-Opt moves involving at most three
nodes between the two removed arcs. 2-Opt∗ selects two routes and removes an arc from each of them. It then merges
the ﬁrst sequence of each route with the second sequence of the other (Potvin and Rousseau, 1995). Exchange swaps the
positions of two nodes, and Relocate shifts one node from its current position to another position.
    The neighbourhoods are searched in a way that is similar to that of the LS procedure of Hiermann et al. (2016). The four
neighbourhoods are stored in a list that is randomly shuﬄed prior to each LS phase to determine in which order they will
be searched. The ﬁrst neighbourhood in the list is then searched until the solution cannot be further improved. Once this
occurs, the following neighbourhood is explored, and so on. The search restarts with the ﬁrst neighbourhood in the list once
the end of the list is reached. When none of the neighbourhoods can further improve the current solution, the LS phase
terminates. The ordering of the potential moves when searching a neighbourhood is also randomly shuﬄed each time a
move is implemented.


5.5. Acceptance criterion

    A simulated annealing mechanism is used to determine whether the solution generated at an iteration should be ac-
cepted or not. The term C(X) refers to the nominal cost of a solution X, and XCur and XNew refer to the current and new
solution at a given iteration, respectively. If C(XNew ) < C(XCur ), then XNew is always accepted. If C(XNew ) > C(XCur ), then the
solution XNew is accepted with probability exp[−(C (XNew ) − C (XCur ))/T ], where T is the current temperature. We initialize
the temperature to a value of Tinit and multiply it at each iteration by a cooling rate r ∈ (0, 1). With XInitial referring to
the initial solution of the algorithm, TInit is set according to parameter ω, itself determined so that a solution X of value
C (X ) = ω · C (XInitial ) is accepted with probability 0.5. The cooling rate r is set so that the temperature is below 0.001 for
the last 20% of the iterations. In Algorithm 1, CR (X) refers to the robust cost (i.e., with energy costs computed with the
worst-case energy consumption of vehicles) of solution X.
    Finally, to further diversify the search, when the solution XNew is not a new solution for D consecutive iterations of the
LNS phase, the nodes that are removed during the following iteration are subsequently inserted back into the solution with
a Random insertion operator, and the resulting solution is always accepted. The Random insertion operator ﬁrst shuﬄes the
list containing the removed nodes to determine the order in which they will be inserted back into the solution. For each
node in the list, a random insertion position is computed iteratively until a feasible insertion position has been found. The
less costly option between inserting the node in that position or creating a new route is then implemented.


5.6. Checking robustness

   In order to generate a suﬃcient number of energy-robust routes for the SP phase, we always check whether any new
robust routes are in the solution XTemp obtained immediately after applying a removal operator and an insertion operator
on XCur . However, in order to avoid making the set partitioning problem too large and slowing down the LS, we do not
always check for new robust routes during the LS when it is performed. When the LS is performed starting from solution
XTemp , if the nominal cost of XTemp is less than a given threshold, we check the robustness of any new routes encoun-
tered during the LS phase (i.e., whenever we move from the current solution to a neighbour solution during the LS, any
new routes in the chosen neighbour solution are checked for robustness and added to the pool of robust routes accord-
ingly). The threshold is set as τ times the nominal cost of the best known nominal solution XBestNominal , with τ being
                                              S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255                                   237


a parameter of the algorithm. If the LS is performed starting from solution XTemp but the nominal cost of XTemp is more
than this threshold, then new routes encountered during the LS are not checked for robustness. However, we check the
robustness of any new routes in the ﬁnal solution returned by the LS. Moreover, whenever any solution X is checked for
new robust routes during the LNS phase, we also verify whether all its routes happen to be robust. If this is the case,
we update the best known robust solution XBestRobust found during the ﬁrst phase of the heuristic according to whether
CR (X) < CR (XBestRobust ) or not. Note that XBestRobust could be empty at the end of the ﬁrst phase. If it is not, after the SP
phase we choose the best alternative between XBestRobust and the solution to the SP problem (see next section) as the ﬁnal
solution.
    Eﬃciently computing the worst-case energy consumption of a route in the current solution is critical to the two-phase
heuristic. Checking whether the worst-case energy consumption of vehicle k is feasible (i.e., if wk ≤ Q) is equivalent to check-
ing whether the optimal value of (42)–(43) is at most Q. With the budgeted uncertainty sets Uk2 and Uk3 , this can be done
eﬃciently by sorting the values of (aˆi j + ˆbi j · f ) for the arcs in the route of vehicle k and setting the ζ ijk variables in
                                                                              i jk
problem (42)–(43) accordingly. For example, with route-dependent uncertainty sets Uk3 , because aˆi j , bˆ i j ≥ 0 ∀(i, j ) ∈ A, the
optimal solution of problem (42)–(43) is

                                            
 • ζi jk = 1 for the θ0 + θ (i, j )∈A xi jk arcs with the largest (aˆi j + bˆ i j · fi jk ) values in the route of vehicle k,
                                                                                            
 • ζ
     i jk = θ0 + θ   (i, j )∈A xi jk − θ0 + θ   (i, j )∈A xi jk for the arc with the θ0 + θ     (i, j )∈A xi jk + 1th largest (aˆi j + bi j · f i jk ) value
                                                                                                                                       ˆ
     in the route of vehicle k,
 •   ζi jk = 0 otherwise.

   With the ellipsoidal uncertainty sets Uk5 , solving (42)–(43) can also be done eﬃciently since the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker
optimality conditions yield the following closed formula for its optimal solution (Ilyina, 2017):

                                                        
                                                 r·              σ(i, j ),(l,m) · aˆlm · xlmk + bˆ lm · flmk
                                                      (l,m )∈A
        ζi jk =                                                                                                                           ∀(i, j ) ∈ A,
                                                                                  
                                       aˆ pq · x pqk + ˆb pq · f pqk ·                      σ( p,q),(l,m) · aˆlm · xlmk + ˆblm · flmk
                           ( p,q )∈A                                             (l,m )∈A


where σ (i,j),(l,m) is the covariance between arcs (i, j) and (l, m), or the variance in the case that (i, j ) = (l, m ). The optimal
value of (42)–(43) is then
                                                          
                                                          
                                                        
                        ai j · xi jk + bi j · fi jk + r ·                   aˆi j · xi jk + ˆbi j · fi jk ·              σ(i, j ),(l,m) · aˆlm · xlmk + ˆblm · flmk   .
        (i, j )∈A                                                (i, j )∈A                                     (l,m )∈A


Note that the correlation between components of Zk that are associated with arcs in the route of vehicle k and components
of Zk that are associated with arcs that are not in the route of vehicle k does not inﬂuence the above optimal value of
(42)–(43).
   With the uncertainty sets Uk4 formed by the intersection of the box uncertainty set with the ball of radius γ centered at
the origin, problem (42)–(43) becomes a quadratically constrained program. We therefore use a commercial solver within
the LNS phase itself to check the robustness of new routes when solving the problem with sets Uk4 . Since this renders the
evaluation of the worst-case energy consumption of a route more diﬃcult, the beneﬁt of not forcing robustness throughout
the LNS phase becomes self-evident.
   Finally, we mention that we store the information regarding the robustness of new routes (i.e., their worst-case energy
consumption) for future use so that the above computations only need to be performed the ﬁrst time a route is encountered.
The robustness of previously encountered routes can thus be checked quickly when updating XBestRobust .



5.7. Set partitioning phase

    Once the LNS phase has run for κ iterations, an SP problem is solved over the pool of routes R to ﬁnd a robust solution
XSP . Recall that all routes in R are robust, i.e., their worst-case energy consumption is less than the battery capacity. Before
solving the SP problem, a robust local search (RLS) is performed on the best known nominal solution XBestNominal to get so-
lution XLNS/RLS . The RLS is the same as the LS described in Section 5.4, except that only those moves leading to robust routes
are performed, and the neighbourhoods are always searched in the same order. The RLS uses the same neighbourhoods
as the LS (i.e., 2-Opt, 2-Opt∗ , Relocate, and Exchange), but evaluates energy feasibility and costs with the worst-case energy
consumption of routes rather than with the expected one. All new routes encountered during the RLS are then added to
R , and XBestRobust is updated according to XLNS/RLS .
238                                      S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


   Let binary variable yr take value 1 if and only if energy-robust route r ∈ R is chosen. Let cr be the total robust cost of
route r (i.e., with energy costs computed with the route’s worst-case energy consumption), and pir be a binary parameter
equal to 1 if and only if customer i ∈ N0 is in route r. The SP problem is to

      minimize                 cr · yr                                                                                                (46)
                        r∈r

      subject to
                        pir · yr = 1           i ∈ N0                                                                                 (47)
                 r∈R

              yr ≤ |K |                                                                                                               (48)
       r∈R

      yr ∈ {0, 1}         r ∈ R .                                                                                                    (49)
   Since the maximum ﬂeet size is ensured via constraint (48) in the SP formulation, we allow solutions to contain more
routes than the ﬂeet size during the LNS phase. However, we do not consider such solutions as potential incumbents to
replace XBestRobust , i.e., we assume that C R (X ) = ∞ if the number of routes in solution X is larger than |K|. Finally, the RLS is
performed once again on the best found solution XSP to the SP problem. The less costly alternative between the resulting
solution XSP/RLS and the best found robust solution XBestRobust over the course of the LNS phase is then chosen as the ﬁnal
solution.
   Preliminary experiments have indicated that solving the SP problem in two phases can accelerate its resolution. There-
                                                                                            
fore, we ﬁrst minimize the number of vehicles by replacing the objective (46) with             r∈r yr . Letting m refer to the best
found number of vehicles, we then solve (46)–(49) but replace the maximum ﬂeet size |K| with min {m, |K|}.

6. Computational experiments

    We have performed extensive computational experiments in order to assess the quality of our heuristic, to compare nom-
inal solutions with robust solutions, to illustrate the trade-off between cost and risk among different robust solutions, and
to investigate the inﬂuence of different parameters in the energy consumption model and in the uncertainty sets on robust
solutions. To this end, we have generated test instances and solved them with the algorithms presented in the previous
two sections. We have also tested our heuristic on existing benchmark instances of related problems. All algorithms were
implemented in C++ and all experiments were conducted on a cluster of 27 machines, each having two Intel(R) Xeon(R)
X5675 3.07 GHz processors with 96 GB of RAM running on Linux. Each machine has 12 cores, and each instance was run
using a single thread. All test instances using the reformulation and the cutting plane method described in Sections 4.1 and
4.2 were solved using CPLEX 12.8 with a time limit of three hours. The SP problem within the two-phase heuristic was also
solved using CPLEX 12.8. We set a time limit of TSP1 seconds for the vehicle minimization phase of the SP problem, and of
TSP2 for the cost minimization phase.
    The remainder of this section is organized as follows. We ﬁrst provide a description of the EVRP-ECU test instances and
report the values used in the experiments for the parameters of our two-phase heuristic in Section 6.1. In Sections 6.2 and
6.3 we evaluate the performance of the heuristic on small and large EVRP-ECU instances, respectively. The quality of the two-
phase method is further assessed in Section 6.4 by testing it on the related capacitated vehicle routing problem (CVRP) and
robust capacitated vehicle routing problem (RCVRP). In Section 6.5, we illustrate how the robust optimization methodology
can be used to achieve the right balance between cost and risk. We then investigate the impact of correlation between
arcs in a given route with respect to energy consumption uncertainties in Section 6.6. Finally, in Section 6.7 we analyze the
impact of speciﬁc uncertain parameters in the energy consumption model described in Section 3.2 on robust solutions.

6.1. Test instances and parameter tuning

    We have generated test instances by using the customer conﬁgurations from the EVRP with non-linear charging function
instances presented in Montoya et al. (2017). These instances were designed to represent a geographic space of 120 × 120
kilometres, which is a reasonable area to cover without en route recharging, considering the average range of modern EFVs
is approximately 125 km (Tretvik et al., 2017). There are ﬁve instances for each of the following number n of customers:
10, 20, 40, 80, 160, and 320. The node locations are determined according to a continuous uniform distribution, a random
clustered distribution, or a mixture of both. The maximum ﬂeet size is set to 1 + n/5. Customer demands are randomly
generated between 50 and 450 kg.
    The ﬂeet vehicles are assumed to be medium-duty electric trucks equipped with 100 kWh batteries. We have used
some vehicle and expected values for the energy consumption model parameters similar to those used by Goeke and
Schneider (2015) and Demir et al. (2012). However, these studies do not consider auxiliary power nor dispatching costs.
Asamer et al. (2016) found that an auxiliary power of approximately 450W is most frequently consumed by a passenger
electric vehicle that is roughly seven times lighter than the electric trucks we consider in terms of gross vehicle weight. To
err on the side of caution, we used half of this ratio, i.e., we assume an expected auxiliary power of P = 3.5 · 450 = 1575
                             S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255       239


                                          Table 1
                                          Vehicle, cost and expected energy consumption model pa-
                                          rameter values.

                                             Parameter                                     Value used

                                             Battery capacity Q                            100 kWh
                                             Curb mass w                                   6,350 kg
                                             Load capacity L                               3,650 kg
                                             Frontal area A                                3.912 m2
                                             Expected air drag coeﬃcient Cd                0.7
                                             Expected rolling friction coeﬃcient Cr        0.01
                                             Expected auxiliary power demand P             1,575 W
                                             Gravitational constant g                      9.81 m/s2
                                             Expected air density ρ                        1.2041 kg/m3
                                             Expected drivetrain eﬃciency φ                1.3175
                                             Maintenance costs cM                          $0.0 0 016/m
                                             Energy cost cE                                $0.11/kWh
                                             Fixed cost cF                                 $118



                                                  Table 2
                                                  Uncertainty set parameter values.

                                                    Uncertainty set parameter       Value used

                                                    θ0                              4.22
                                                    θ                               0.22
                                                    γ                               2.45
                                                    r                               1.65




W when computing the expected energy consumption parameter values aij and bij . The energy and maintenance costs are
based on those used by Davis and Figliozzi (2013). To determine the ﬁxed dispatching cost cF , we assume the same hourly
salary of the drivers as in Goeke and Schneider (2015) and a nine-hour shift; cF is thus set to $118. The values of the cost,
vehicle, and energy consumption model-related parameters are reported in Table 1.
   Since we do not have a detailed road graph associated with the arcs in the VRP graphs of our instances, we estimate
the arcs’ expected energy consumption parameter values aij and bij by assuming that all arcs are traveled at an expected
constant speed of 45 km/h, and that the road grade θ ij is zero along all arcs. We initially set the maximum deviations aˆi j
and ˆbi j to 20% of the expected values aij and bij . In Section 6.7, however, we investigate the impact of using the worst-case
values from Asamer et al. (2016) for certain parameters individually.
    Regarding the uncertainty sets, we have conducted experiments with several of those presented in Section 3.5, while
assuming they are the same for all vehicles. The route-dependent budgeted sets Uk3 and the uncertainty sets Uk4 formed by
the intersection of the box uncertainty set with the ball of radius γ centered at the origin are used to represent the case of
independent components in the random vectors Zk , with each Zijk symmetrically distributed within the interval [−1, 1]. The
ellipsoidal uncertainty sets Uk5 are used to represent normally distributed random vectors Zk , each of mean zero and with
covariance matrix  . Since the support of Zk is assumed to be [−1, 1], we set standard deviations to 0.333 for each Zijk , and
assume a correlation of 0.9 between the arcs. The values used for θ 0 , θ , γ and r in Uk3 , Uk4 and Uk5 are initially set so that
there is a probability of at most β = 0.05 that the real energy consumption of vehicle k be larger than wk . These values are
given in Table 2. We refer the reader to Ben-Tal et al. (2009), Poss (2013) and Ilyina (2017) for more details concerning the
calibration methodology, which is too extensive to discuss here.
    Finally, we conducted some preliminary experiments on a small number of instances to ﬁne-tune the parameters of the
LNS-based algorithm. More speciﬁcally, we used one instance for each possible number of customers n with uncertainty
sets Uk3 , and we tested a number of predetermined combinations of parameter values using our best judgment. We then
chose the combination that performed best on the subset of six instances. The values corresponding to this combination are
reported in Table 3 and were used in all experiments of the following sections.


6.2. Performance of the two-phase method on small EVRP-ECU instances

   In order to get an idea of the performance of our solution method, we have used the reformulation and cutting plane
methods described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 on small instances of the EVRP-ECU with up to 20 customers. The results are
reported in Tables 4, 5 and 6 for β = 0.05 and the uncertainty sets Uk3 , Uk4 and Uk5 , respectively. Results are given for both
the nominal and the robust versions of the problem for each instance. Recall that in the nominal version, it is assumed
that the energy consumption parameters never deviate from their expected values. We still conduct the SP phase (and
the subsequent LS) in this case since it can only improve the ﬁnal solution XFinal returned by the procedure. However, the
parameter τ is set to zero for all runs on the nominal version of the problem.
240                                S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


                              Table 3
                              Two-phase heuristic parameter values.

                               Parameter                                                                   Value used

                               Bounds (nc , nc ) on number of customers to remove                          (0.1 · n, 0.4 · n)

                               Parameters used for randomization (λWR , λWE , λWD , λShaw , λRG , λRR )    (3, 6, 3, 6, 1.5, 1.5)

                               Shaw parameters (μ1 , μ2 , μ3 , μ4 )                                        (0.4, 0.3, 0.15, 0.1)

                               Threshold δ to perform LS                                                   1.04 if n = 320
                                                                                                           1.09 if n = 160
                                                                                                           1.18 if n = 80
                                                                                                           ∞ otherwise

                               Threshold τ to check for new robust routes during LS                        0.95 if n = 320
                                                                                                           1.05 if n = 160
                                                                                                           ∞ otherwise

                               Factor ω used to set initial temperature                                    1.02

                               Number of LNS iterations κ before SP phase                                  12,500

                               Time limit TSP1 for vehicle minimization phase of the SP problem            60 s

                               Time limit TSP2 for cost minimization phase of the SP problem               1200 s if n = 320
                                                                                                           900 s if n = 160
                                                                                                           600 s if n = 80
                                                                                                           300 s otherwise

                               Maximum number D of LNS iterations                                          10 if n = 320
                               without encountering a new solution                                         20 if n = 160
                               before using the Random insertion operator                                  90 if n = 80
                                                                                                           200 if n = 40
                                                                                                           10 0 0 if n = 20
                                                                                                           40 0 0 if n = 10


      Table 4
      Results for the small instances with uncertainty sets Uk3 and β = 0.05.

                    Nominal                                                       Robust

                    CPLEX                  LNS+SP                                 CPLEX                                 LNS+SP

        Instance    Best       t (s)       Best        m     Avg.       t (s)     Best       Method       t (s)         Best        m   Avg.     t (s)

        1-10C       294.62     2445.86     294.62      2     294.62     2.02      321.23     R            2386.77       321.23      2   321.23   2.58
        2-10C       316.45     2188.09     316.45      2     316.45     1.74      319.69     C            2996.37       319.69      2   319.69   2.27
        3-10C       292.62     1584.54     292.62      2     292.62     3.99      321.95     R            1737.46       321.95      2   321.95   5.32
        4-10C       324.55     248.64      324.55      2     324.55     2.75      328.08     C            374.06        328.08      2   328.08   3.65
        5-10C       326.88     398.02      326.88      2     326.88     2.41      454.70     R            1634.42       454.70      3   454.70   3.23
        1-20C       471.45     10800       470.64      3     470.64     8.14      –          C+ R         10800         810.56      5   810.56   9.34
        2-20C       326.09     6652.50     326.09      2     326.09     8.49      464.55     C            10800         459.95      3   460.74   9.57
        3-20C       334.82     10800       334.79      2     334.79     9.68      610.04     R            10800         486.79      3   486.81   11.05
        4-20C       324.75     548.67      324.75      2     324.75     10.38     450.64     R            10800         450.64      3   450.64   11.81
        5-20C       463.41     10800       462.92      3     462.92     10.56     468.37     C            10800         468.37      3   468.37   12.65


      Table 5
      Results for the small instances with uncertainty sets Uk4 and β = 0.05.

                    Nominal                                                       Robust

                    CPLEX                  LNS+SP                                 CPLEX                                 LNS+SP

        Instance    Best       t (s)       Best       m      Avg.       t (s)     Best       Method       t (s)         Best        m   Avg.     t (s)

        1-10C       294.62     2445.86     294.62     2      294.62     2.02      321.24     C            3354.75       321.24      2   321.24   4.28
        2-10C       316.45     2188.09     316.45     2      316.45     1.74      319.75     C            2035.69       319.75      2   319.75   3.32
        3-10C       292.62     1584.54     292.62     2      292.62     3.99      321.96     C            5108.32       321.96      2   321.96   15.47
        4-10C       324.55     248.64      324.55     2      324.55     2.75      328.10     C            204.48        328.10      2   328.10   6.96
        5-10C       326.88     398.02      326.88     2      326.88     2.41      454.72     C            2920.70       454.72      3   454.72   4.93
        1-20C       471.45     10800       470.64     3      470.64     8.14      –          C            10800         810.58      5   810.58   16.65
        2-20C       326.09     6652.50     326.09     2      326.09     8.49      464.64     C            10800         459.93      3   462.72   16.61
        3-20C       334.82     10800       334.79     2      334.79     9.68      609.45     C            10800         486.88      3   486.92   18.49
        4-20C       324.75     548.67      324.75     2      324.75     10.38     451.14     C            10800         450.65      3   450.65   17.77
        5-20C       463.41     10800       462.92     3      462.92     10.56     472.22     C            10800         468.45      3   468.45   22.02
                                 S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255                        241


     Table 6
     Results for the small instances with uncertainty sets Uk5 and β = 0.05.

                   Nominal                                                      Robust

                   CPLEX                 LNS+SP                                 CPLEX                               LNS+SP

       Instance    Best      t (s)       Best        m     Avg.       t (s)     Best       Method       t (s)       Best      m   Avg.     t (s)

       1-10C       294.62    2445.86     294.62      2     294.62     2.02      295.93     C            640.76      295.93    2   295.93   2.53
       2-10C       316.45    2188.09     316.45      2     316.45     1.74      318.19     C            1379.18     318.19    2   318.19   2.30
       3-10C       292.62    1584.54     292.62      2     292.62     3.99      308.45     C            1210.09     308.45    2   308.45   5.36
       4-10C       324.55    248.64      324.55      2     324.55     2.75      326.47     C            605.05      326.47    2   326.47   3.62
       5-10C       326.88    398.02      326.88      2     326.88     2.41      333.65     C            207.45      333.65    2   333.65   3.16
       1-20C       471.45    10800       470.64      3     470.64     8.14      643.58     C            10800       643.14    4   643.14   9.66
       2-20C       326.09    6652.50     326.09      2     326.09     8.49      455.59     C            10800       328.13    2   328.13   9.62
       3-20C       334.82    10800       334.79      2     334.79     9.68      481.60     C            10800       480.96    3   480.96   10.92
       4-20C       324.75    548.67      324.75      2     324.75     10.38     449.90     C            10800       330.65    2   330.65   11.60
       5-20C       463.41    10800       462.92      3     462.92     10.56     466.05     C            10800       465.28    3   465.28   12.51




   Since the route-dependent uncertainty sets are polyhedral, we apply both the reformulation approach and the cutting
plane method (with cuts (45)) for the robust version of the problem when it is solved with CPLEX and those sets. Only the
cutting plane method (with cuts (44)) is applied when solving the robust version with CPLEX and the other uncertainty sets.
Whenever the robust version of the problem is solved with CPLEX, we report the best found solution value, the solution
time, and the method that achieved it (i.e., “R” for the reformulation or “C” for the cutting plane method; ties are broken
based on solution times). When the nominal version is solved with CPLEX, we only report the best found solution value and
the solution time. In this case, we simply use CPLEX to solve the mixed integer linear program (MILP) resulting from having
empty uncertainty sets in the model of Section 3.4. Symmetry breaking inequalities are also added to the formulation for
both the robust and nominal cases. Speciﬁcally, these inequalities force vehicles with a smaller index k to be used before
those with a larger one, and to leave the depot with a larger load. For the two-phase heuristic method, in both the nominal
and robust cases, we report the cost of the best found solution over 10 runs, the number of vehicles m in the best found
solution, as well as the average cost and average solution time in seconds over the 10 runs.
   The results show that the two-phase method clearly outperforms the reformulation and the cutting plane method on
each instance when the robust version of the problem is solved. When CPLEX ﬁnds an optimal solution within the three-
hour time limit, our heuristic consistently ﬁnds it in much less time. When CPLEX cannot guarantee the optimality of its
best found solution, our heuristic always quickly ﬁnds a solution at least as good as the one reported by CPLEX, and usually
better. The same holds for the results on the nominal version of the problem when comparing the heuristic to using CPLEX
on the MILP representing the nominal case.


6.3. Performance of the two-phase method on large EVRP-ECU instances

    For those instances with more than 20 customers, none of the exact methods is able to ﬁnd a feasible solution within
the time limit for both the robust and the nominal cases. Therefore, we only report the performance of the metaheuristic for
these instances. The results are presented in Table 7 for the nominal version of the problem and for the robust version with
the three types of uncertainty sets used. We once again report the cost of the best found solution over 10 runs, the number
of vehicles in the best found solution, as well as the average cost and time over the 10 runs for each instance and variation.
When no value is reported, this means that the algorithm was unable to ﬁnd a feasible robust solution (the SP problem is
infeasible and no robust solution was found during the LNS phase). It is conceivable that such instances are infeasible, i.e.,
there is a customer i for which there exists no route k visiting i so that wk ≤ Q, or routes require to be very short in order
to be energy-robust, thereby requiring too many vehicles.
    Despite the fact that we do not have benchmark solutions for these larger EVRP-ECU instances to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the metaheuristic, the algorithm seems relatively stable when comparing the average cost over ten runs with the
best run for most instances. The solution times could be considered high for some instances with 80 customers or more,
but this is partly due to the fact that the set partitioning problem is sometimes not solved to optimality and therefore uses
the entire time allotted to it. We mention, however, that when this occurs the optimality gap of the best found solution
for the SP problem is usually relatively small (except for the 320-customer instances), and the solution is also subsequently
improved through the ﬁnal robust local search phase. The results with the uncertainty sets Uk4 formed by the intersection
of the box uncertainty set with the ball of radius γ centered at the origin show the importance of using sets allowing to
eﬃciently check the robustness of routes. Recall from Section 5.6 that with uncertainty sets Uk4 , we solve a quadratically
constrained program (with CPLEX) to check whether a new route is robust. This results in much larger solution times for
the 320-customer instances.
    It is also interesting to observe the difference between the best found solutions in nominal and robust versions of the
problem. Indeed, for both the small instances results in Tables 4, 5 and 6, and the large instances results in Table 7, there
                                                                                                                                                                                                      242




                                                                                                                                                                                                      S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
Table 7
Results for the large instances with sets Uk3 , Uk4 and Uk5 , and with β = 0.05.

                Nominal                                             Uncertainty sets Uk3                       Uncertainty sets Uk4                        Uncertainty sets Uk5

  Instance      Best           m       Avg.          t (s)          Best           m       Avg.      t (s)     Best         m         Avg.      t (s)      Best          m        Avg.      t (s)

  1-40C         632.40         4       632.40        34.65          646.45         4       646.45    39.86     646.64       4         646.64    55.69      636.25        4        636.25    39.50
  2-40C         999.64         6       999.64        34.56          –              –       –         –         –            –         –         –          –             –        –         –
  3-40C         632.39         4       632.39        36.13          789.92         5       789.92    41.39     789.95       5         789.95    63.40      636.42        4        636.42    41.10
  4-40C         473.03         3       473.03        40.75          601.91         4       601.91    45.91     601.92       4         601.92    71.35      481.63        3        481.63    48.24
  5-40C         639.31         4       639.31        46.73          801.60         5       801.61    55.57     801.81       5         801.81    97.38      787.37        5        787.66    69.04
  1-80C         931.18         6       931.18        219.11         941.35         6       941.35    285.57    941.28       6         941.28    399.75     938.90        6        938.90    301.20
  2-80C         950.52         6       950.68        203.23         1109.76        7       1109.76   248.97    1109.80      7         1109.80   356.81     970.96        6        1052.91   261.02
  3-80C         903.02         6       903.02        251.74         922.98         6       925.07    754.40    922.43       6         923.70    970.16     911.70        6        911.76    454.58
  4-80C         896.95         6       896.95        233.43         904.13         6       904.13    351.53    904.01       6         904.01    587.69     901.32        6        901.32    293.16
  5-80C         943.82         6       943.82        224.74         1111.80        7       1113.62   232.13    1111.71      7         1113.25   377.38     971.58        6        1008.63   403.03
  1-160C        1862.32        12      1863.63       1814.32        –              –       –         –         –            –         –         –          2068.06       13       2165.07   1933.53
  2-160C        1777.43        12      1778.91       2224.54        1794.86        12      1795.35   2360.19   1794.59      12        1795.07   3349.30    1786.01       12       1788.18   2264.71
  3-160C        1670.80        11      1672.70       1571.13        1683.89        11      1686.06   1609.33   1683.70      11        1686.30   2504.15    1680.14       11       1683.09   1776.55
  4-160C        1684.96        11      1687.88       1470.01        1872.68        12      1929.74   1431.21   1869.79      12        1890.05   2490.75    1711.48       11       1714.93   1293.94
  5-160C        1729.75        11      1731.91       1267.17        –              –       –         –         –            –         –         –          1938.09       12       2064.32   1099.00
  1-320C        3780.68        24      3788.77       3034.93        –              –       –         –         –            –         –         –          –             –        –         –
  2-320C        3217.63        22      3221.16       5435.32        3238.64        22      3244.47   6745.20   3241.45      22        3245.28   15972.70   3229.04       22       3235.80   6093.11
  3-320C        3379.40        22      3393.95       2078.88        –              –       –         –         –            –         –         –          3769.91       24       3913.29   2485.39
  4-320C        3341.18        22      3384.28       6554.97        3625.48        24      3684.60   7231.61   3626.51      24        3679.36   20420.30   3458.93       23       3489.00   7813.37
  5-320C        3294.02        22      3297.16       6837.66        3366.80        22      3481.77   7478.53   3363.10      22        3460.38   18871.70   3334.11       22       3354.32   7427.62
                               S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255                 243


               Table 8
               Feasibility of best found nominal solutions and the price of robustness.

                             Uncertainty sets Uk3                Uncertainty sets Uk4                 Uncertainty sets Uk5

                 Instance    Number of      Cost diff. of        Number of       Cost diff. of        Number of       Cost diff. of
                             inf. routes    rob. solution (%)    inf. routes     rob. solution (%)    inf. routes     rob. solution (%)

                 1-10C       1/2            8.15                 1/2             8.15                 0/2             0.00
                 2-10C       0/2            0.00                 0/2             0.00                 0/2             0.00
                 3-10C       1/2            9.16                 1/2             9.16                 1/2             4.96
                 4-10C       0/2            0.00                 0/2             0.00                 0/2             0.00
                 5-10C       1/2            37.55                1/2             37.56                1/2             1.45
                 1-20C       2/3            70.52                2/3             70.52                2/3             35.90
                 2-20C       2/2            39.61                2/2             39.61                0/2             0.00
                 3-20C       2/2            43.82                2/2             43.85                2/2             42.72
                 4-20C       1/2            37.34                1/2             37.36                1/2             1.20
                 5-20C       1/3            0.27                 1/3             0.28                 0/3             0.00
                 1-40C       2/4            1.31                 2/4             1.32                 2/4             0.03
                 2-40C       5/6            –                    4/6             –                    4/6             –
                 3-40C       3/4            23.65                3/4             23.66                1/4             0.06
                 4-40C       1/3            25.97                1/3             25.97                1/3             1.22
                 5-40C       2/4            24.16                2/4             24.20                2/4             22.43
                 1-80C       1/6            0.29                 1/6             0.29                 1/6             0.28
                 2-80C       3/6            15.79                3/6             15.80                2/6             1.55
                 3-80C       2/6            1.41                 2/6             1.36                 2/6             0.46
                 4-80C       0/6            0.00                 0/6             0.00                 0/6             0.00
                 5-80C       2/6            16.68                2/6             16.70                1/6             2.35
                 1-160C      5/12           –                    5/12            –                    4/12            10.43
                 2-160C      1/12           0.18                 1/12            0.18                 0/12            0.01
                 3-160C      1/11           0.03                 1/11            0.03                 1/11            0.04
                 4-160C      4/11           10.23                4/11            10.08                4/11            1.03
                 5-160C      5/11           –                    5/11            –                    4/11            11.40
                 1-320C      12/24          –                    12/24           –                    12/24           –
                 2-320C      1/22           -0.07                1/22            0.03                 0/22            -0.10
                 3-320C      8/22           –                    8/22            –                    8/22            10.95
                 4-320C      4/22           4.17                 4/22            4.26                 3/22            2.98
                 5-320C      4/22           1.43                 4/22            1.34                 2/22            0.72




are often signiﬁcant differences between the values of the best found nominal and the best found robust solutions. Taking
into account the energy consumption uncertainty sometimes results in using the same number of vehicles but routing
them differently in order to be robust, or in using more vehicles than in the nominal case. The uncertainty sets Uk3 and
Uk4 make the same assumptions regarding the random vectors Zk and hence return similar solutions. The sets Uk5 , on the
other hand, assume that we have much more information regarding the distribution of Zk , and the robust solutions become
less conservative than with the other two sets. There are even instances that appear to be infeasible with the other two
uncertainty sets but not with sets Uk5 .
    We further demonstrate the difference between nominal and robust solutions through Table 8, in which we report two
measures pertaining to the best found nominal solutions. First, for each instance we report the number of routes in the
best found nominal solution (out of the total in the solution) that violate constraints (17) under each uncertainty set. This
indicates how often the nominal solution fails with each of the uncertainty sets. Second, for each instance we report the
cost increase or decrease (in %) of the best found robust solution under each uncertainty set with respect to the best found
nominal solution, when the energy costs in the nominal solution are computed with a worst-case energy consumption
under the uncertainty set in question. When no value is reported for this second measure, no feasible robust solution was
found for that instance and uncertainty set. As the entries show, the majority of best found nominal solutions contain one
or several routes that would be infeasible in the robust version of the problem. The degree of the cost increase in the best
found robust solution depends on whether more vehicles are required to ensure energy feasibility compared to the number
of vehicles in the best found nominal solution. When this is the case, the robust solution is of course signiﬁcantly more
costly than the nominal one. On the other hand, when no additional vehicles are required to ensure energy robustness (i.e.,
this can be done by rearranging the same number of routes), the cost difference between the best found robust and nominal
solutions can be quite small.

6.4. Performance of the two-phase method on CVRP and RCVRP instances

   In order to further validate the performance of the two-phase solution method, we have conducted a few experiments
on available benchmark instances for the related CVRP and the RCVRP. The EVRP-ECU can indeed be reduced to a CVRP
when the battery capacity is inﬁnite and there are no ﬁxed dispatching costs nor energy costs. We have therefore tested
244                                S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


our heuristic on the well-known 14 instances (C1, ..., C14) of Christoﬁdes et al. (1979), the 20 instances (G1, ..., G20) of
Golden et al. (1998), the instances of the sets A, B, and P of Augerat (1995), as well as the instances of the sets E, F, and M
proposed by Christoﬁdes and Eilon (1969), Fisher (1994) and Christoﬁdes et al. (1979), respectively. The ﬁrst group contains
a number of customers n ranging from 50 to 199. The second represents large-scale instances and contains between 200 and
483 customers. The number of customers in the sets A, B, P, E, F, and M varies from 12 to 199, and the number of required
routes is ﬁxed, which is handled through the SP phase and the subsequent ﬁnal local search (in this case we disregard the
best found number of vehicles m in the SP vehicle minimization phase, and in Algorithm 1 we assume that C R (X ) = ∞ if
the number of routes in solution X is not equal to the required number of routes). Some instances also have maximum
route durations and customer service times. We therefore adapted our heuristic to handle these extra features (feasibility
with respect to route durations is enforced throughout the procedure).
   The RCVRP additionally considers that the customer demands qi are uncertain parameters. In the RCVRP, it is therefore
assumed that each customer i has a certain nominal demand q0i from which we expect the realized customer demand qi
to deviate according to some uncertainty set. We have tested our heuristic on the RCVRP variants of the above instances,
which were introduced by Gounaris et al. (2013) and Gounaris et al. (2016). We solve these instances with the following
two uncertainty sets for the customer demands (which are those used by Gounaris et al., 2013 and Gounaris et al., 2016 in
their experiments):
                                                                                         
      UQ1 =       q ∈ Rn+   | qi ≤ qi ≤ qi ∀i ∈ N0 ,           qi ≤ b j for j = 1, . . . , J ,                                  (50)
                                                       i∈B j
                                                                   
      UQ2 = q ∈ Rn+ | q = q0 +  ξ for some ξ ∈  ,                                                                             (51)
where  = {ξ ∈ RF | ξ ∈ [−e, +e], eT ξ ∈ [−β F , +β F ]}, q0 ∈ Rn+ ,  ∈ Rn×F , F ∈ N, β ∈ [0, 1], and e ∈ RF is a vector with only
ones. The uncertainty set UQ1 states that each customer demand qi must lie within a given interval [qi , qi ], and that the
sum of the demands of the customers in each subset Bj ⊆N0 must be at most bj . The uncertainty set UQ2 states that the
demand vector q is the sum of a nominal demand vector q0 and a disturbance  ξ that depends on F independent factors,
thereby allowing correlations between customer demands to be taken into account. We modiﬁed our two-phase heuristic
so that routes are added to the pool of robust routes R when their worst-case total demand is at most the vehicle’s load
capacity L. We use propositions from Gounaris et al. (2013) to eﬃciently compute a route’s worst-case total demand with
uncertainty sets UQ1 and UQ2 . We also mention that the number of required routes is ﬁxed in all RCVRP instances (even those
based on the Christoﬁdes et al. (1979) and the Golden et al. (1998) CVRP instances), and that the vehicle capacity from the
associated CVRP instance is always increased by 20%. We refer the reader to Gounaris et al. (2016) for more information on
the generation of the RCVRP instances.
    For all parameters of the two-phase heuristic that depend on the number of customers n in Table 3, if n ≥ 320, we use
the same values as for n = 320; if 160 ≤ n < 320, we use the same values as for n = 160; etc. We set parameter τ to zero
in the two-phase heuristic when solving the CVRP, as for the experiments on the nominal version of the EVRP-ECU. The
detailed results are reported in Tables A.1–A.5 of Appendix A for the CVRP and RCVRP instances. We limit our presentation
to instances for which benchmark solutions are available for both the CVRP and RCVRP (there are a few CVRP instances of
sets A, E and M for which no corresponding RCVRP instances were generated by Gounaris et al., 2013). In Tables A.1–A.5,
we report the best found solution (BFS) value by our heuristic over 10 runs, the average cost and average solution time, the
best known solution (BKS) value from the literature, as well as the gap (%) of the BFS by our heuristic with respect to the
BKS. Solutions that are known to be optimal are marked by an asterisk in Tables A.1–A.5.
    We provide a summary of the detailed results of Appendix A in Table 9, where we distinguish between BKSs that are
provenly optimal and those that are not. For each set of instances, we report the number of instances for which we identiﬁed
new best solutions, the number of instances for which the BFS by our heuristic matches the non-proven optimal BKS (NPO-
BKS), the number of instances for which our BFS matches the proven optimal solution (PO-BKS), and the average gap for
the instances for which our BFS is worse than the BKS (whether the BKS is proven optimal or not).
    Our heuristic ﬁnds the BKS for all the tested CVRP instances from sets A, B, P, E, M, and F. It also performs fairly well on
the CVRP instances of Christoﬁdes et al. (1979); the BKS is found for several of these instances, and the gap is quite small
when it is not. The performance of the heuristic deteriorates, however, on the larger instances of Golden et al. (1998), with
a worst-case gap of 3.72% on these instances (obtained for an instance with 480 customers). Finally, the method matches
or improves the BKS reported by Gounaris et al. (2016) for most RCVRP instances. The 42 new best solutions found by the
heuristic are reported in boldface in Tables A.1–A.5. There are, however, a few large-scaled RCVRP instances based on the
Golden et al. (1998) CVRP instances for which the current conﬁguration of the two-phase heuristic was unable to ﬁnd a
feasible robust solution over the 10 runs (i.e., no solution with only robust routes is encountered during the LNS phase,
and CPLEX fails to ﬁnd a feasible solution to the SP problem). These are reported in Table 9 as “Num. of instances with no
FS”. It is conceivable that this could be addressed (and that the method’s performance as a whole on the CVRP and RCVRP
instances could be further improved) by recalibrating the parameters of the algorithm. It is also possible that an adaptive
layer, although not particularly useful on the EVRP-ECU instances, could also increase the heuristic’s competitiveness for
these problem variants. For sake of brevity we do not investigate this any further. Nonetheless, we ﬁnd new best solutions
for 24 of the large-scaled RCVRP instances.
Table 9
Summarized results for the CVRP and RCVRP benchmark instances.




                                                                                                                                                                                       S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
 Instance set                                  Num. of instances   CVRP                                  RCVRP-UQ1                              RCVRP-UQ2

 Instances of the set A (Augerat, 1995)        26                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     1      Num. of new best solutions:     1
                                                                   Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      0      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       13     Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       9
                                                                   Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       26     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        12     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        16
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   –      Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.41   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    –

 Instances of the set B (Augerat, 1995)        23                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     1      Num. of new best solutions:     0
                                                                   Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      0      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       8      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       8
                                                                   Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       23     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        12     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        15
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   –      Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.53   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    –

 Instances of the set P (Augerat, 1995)        24                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     0      Num. of new best solutions:     0
                                                                   Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      0      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       14     Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       13
                                                                   Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       24     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        10     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        11
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   –      Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    –      Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    –

 Instances of the sets E, M and F              17                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     1      Num. of new best solutions:     1
 (Christoﬁdes and Eilon, 1969, Fisher, 1994,                       Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      0      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       6      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       8
 Christoﬁdes et al., 1979)                                         Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       17     Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        8      Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        7
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   –      Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.66   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.81

 Instances of Christoﬁdes et al. (1979)        14                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     7      Num. of new best solutions:     6
                                                                   Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      4      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       6      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       7
                                                                   Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       5      Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        0      Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        0
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   0.39   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.08   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.57

 Instances of Golden et al. (1998)             20                  Num. of new best solutions:    0      Num. of new best solutions:     11     Num. of new best solutions:     13
                                                                   Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:      2      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       0      Num. of matched NPO-BKSs:       1
                                                                   Num. of matched PO-BKSs:       0      Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        0      Num. of matched PO-BKSs:        0
                                                                   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:   1.49   Num. of instances with no FS:   7      Num. of instances with no FS:   6
                                                                                                         Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    0.36   Avg. gap (%) when BFS > BKS:    –




                                                                                                                                                                                       245
246                          S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


                                   Table 10
                                   Best found solutions with different uncertainty sets and different pro-
                                   tection levels.

                                                  Sets Uk5 /β = 0.05    Sets Uk5 /β = 0.01    Sets Uk1 /β = 0

                                     Instance     Value        m        Value        m        Value        m

                                     1-10C        295.93       2        296.47       2        321.25       2
                                     2-10C        318.19       2        318.91       2        319.75       2
                                     3-10C        308.45       2        315.78       2        321.97       2
                                     4-10C        326.47       2        327.26       2        328.17       2
                                     5-10C        333.65       2        453.75       3        454.74       3
                                     1-20C        643.14       4        644.65       4        810.66       5
                                     2-20C        328.13       2        456.29       3        464.25       3
                                     3-20C        480.96       3        482.53       3        487.11       3
                                     4-20C        330.65       2        449.96       3        450.95       3
                                     5-20C        465.28       3        466.25       3        468.57       3
                                     1-40C        636.25       4        637.76       4        776.44       5
                                     2-40C        –            –        –            –        –            –
                                     3-40C        636.42       4        646.41       4        790.29       5
                                     4-40C        481.63       3        600.90       4        602.26       4
                                     5-40C        787.37       5        794.31       5        805.45       5
                                     1-80C        938.90       6        941.25       6        944.26       6
                                     2-80C        970.96       6        1102.50      7        1112.45      7
                                     3-80C        911.70       6        919.47       6        930.79       6
                                     4-80C        901.32       6        903.12       6        905.27       6
                                     5-80C        971.58       6        1101.59      7        1115.56      7
                                     1-160C       2068.06      13       –            –        –            –
                                     2-160C       1786.01      12       1792.05      12       1797.04      12
                                     3-160C       1680.14      11       1683.14      11       1687.87      11
                                     4-160C       1711.48      11       1852.28      12       1880.51      12
                                     5-160C       1938.09      12       2374.66      15       –            –
                                     1-320C       –            –        –            –        –            –
                                     2-320C       3229.04      22       3239.65      22       3244.09      22
                                     3-320C       3769.91      24       4410.57      28       –            –
                                     4-320C       3458.93      23       3492.74      23       3626.51      24
                                     5-320C       3334.11      22       3347.02      22       3378.22      22




6.5. The trade-off between cost and risk

     A nice feature of the robust optimization methodology is that it can be used to present different alternatives to the
decision maker who can then determine when and whether cost savings justify incurring extra risks. We illustrate this by
solving the EVRP-ECU instances with the ellipsoidal uncertainty sets Uk5 representing normally distributed random vectors
Zk , but we now calibrate them so that β = 0.01 instead of 0.05 as in the experiments of the previous sections. The parameter
r is thus increased to 2.33. Moreover, we solve the instances using the box uncertainty sets Uk1 as well, which is equivalent
to setting β = 0 and solving a nominal version of the problem in which the expected values of the energy consumption
parameters are all set to their worst-case values. The results are reported in Table 10, with the best of 10 runs presented
for the new experiments. The previous best found solutions with sets Uk5 and β = 0.05 are also reported.
     As the results show, in some cases, the difference in cost between the three protection levels is rather insigniﬁcant, and
one would therefore beneﬁt from simply using the safest solution, i.e., the routing plan obtained with the box uncertainty
set. However, in other cases, there is a case to be made for incurring a small risk. Indeed, for some instances, the best found
solution with β = 0.01 allows interesting cost savings compared to the no-risk case of β = 0, sometimes even using fewer
vehicles. The same holds when going from β = 0.01 to β = 0.05. In addition, some instances that appear to be infeasible for
a smaller β become feasible by increasing the level of risk. Nevertheless, it is ultimately up to the decision maker to choose
the right balance between cost and risk in the presence of uncertain parameters.

6.6. The impact of correlation in routes

    In this section we take a quick look at the sensitivity of solutions to the correlation between the arcs in a given route,
with respect to the deviation of their realized energy consumption parameter values from their expected ones, i.e., corre-
lation between the components of Zk . As brieﬂy mentioned in Section 3.5, it is reasonable to expect driver behaviour and
external conditions like the weather and road conditions to be fairly similar along the same route. We therefore investigate
the impact of such dependencies on robust solutions by solving the EVRP-ECU instances with uncertainty sets Uk5 and a pro-
tection level of β = 0.01, but by using three new correlation levels in the covariance matrix  : 0.0, 0.3 and 0.6. We report
the best of 10 runs for each case in Table 11. The values in the column associated with the previously used correlation of
                             S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255      247


                        Table 11
                        Best found solutions with sets Uk5 , β = 0.01, and different correlation levels.

                                      No correlation      Correlation of 0.3    Correlation of 0.6      Correlation of 0.9

                          Instance    Value        m      Value       m         Value        m          Value        m

                          1-10C       295.73       2      296.02      2         296.26       2          296.47       2
                          2-10C       317.61       2      318.16      2         318.56       2          318.91       2
                          3-10C       308.09       2      308.50      2         308.82       2          315.78       2
                          4-10C       326.17       2      326.61      2         326.96       2          327.26       2
                          5-10C       331.20       2      333.64      2         453.40       3          453.75       3
                          1-20C       486.00       3      643.53      4         644.12       4          644.65       4
                          2-20C       327.17       2      327.97      2         451.22       3          456.29       3
                          3-20C       475.05       3      480.93      3         481.72       3          482.53       3
                          4-20C       325.92       2      328.76      2         449.56       3          449.96       3
                          5-20C       464.51       3      465.25      3         465.80       3          466.25       3
                          1-40C       634.46       4      635.94      4         636.95       4          637.76       4
                          2-40C       –            –      –           –         –            –          –            –
                          3-40C       635.31       4      636.41      4         637.24       4          646.41       4
                          4-40C       480.36       3      481.60      3         600.39       4          600.90       4
                          5-40C       652.91       4      785.75      5         788.86       5          794.31       5
                          1-80C       936.09       6      938.36      6         939.84       6          941.25       6
                          2-80C       956.74       6      968.79      6         1094.47      7          1102.50      7
                          3-80C       908.85       6      911.39      6         913.53       6          919.47       6
                          4-80C       899.37       6      901.03      6         902.18       6          903.12       6
                          5-80C       951.67       6      971.30      6         1095.40      7          1101.59      7
                          1-160C      1927.93      12     2069.12     13        –            –          –            –
                          2-160C      1782.77      12     1785.76     12        1790.07      12         1792.05      12
                          3-160C      1674.56      11     1679.22     11        1681.18      11         1683.14      11
                          4-160C      1691.98      11     1707.40     11        1722.58      11         1852.28      12
                          5-160C      1880.24      12     2040.34     13        2210.65      14         2374.66      15
                          1-320C      –            –      –           –         –            –          –            –
                          2-320C      3225.95      22     3232.31     22        3233.93      22         3239.65      22
                          3-320C      3563.99      23     3877.77     25        4223.12      27         4410.57      28
                          4-320C      3423.48      23     3459.52     23        3476.16      23         3492.74      23
                          5-320C      3303.41      22     3323.69     22        3336.18      22         3347.02      22



                             Table 12
                             Nominal and worst-case energy consumption model parameter values used to assess
                             the impact of speciﬁc parameters.

                               Energy consumption model parameter          Expected value         Worst-case value

                               Air drag coeﬃcient Cd                       0.7                    0.735
                               Rolling friction coeﬃcient Cr               0.01                   0.014
                               Auxiliary power demand P                    1,575 W                4,431 W
                               Air density ρ                               1.2041 kg/m3           1.296 kg/m3
                               Drivetrain eﬃciency φ                       1.3175                 1.4706
                               Speed                                       45 km/h                36 km/h or 54 km/h




0.9 between the arcs are taken from Table 10. The entries suggest that the cost and number of vehicles in the best found
solutions tend to increase with the degree of correlation between the components of random vectors Zk . There is even an
instance with 160 customers that appears to become infeasible when going from correlations of 0.3 to 0.6.


6.7. The impact of speciﬁc parameters in the energy consumption model

   Our last computational study concerns the impact of speciﬁc parameters in the energy consumption model described in
Section 3.2 on robust solutions. To this end, we modify the instances by computing the maximum deviations aˆi j and ˆbi j from
the expected values of the arcs’ energy parameters with worst-case values inspired from those from Asamer et al. (2016) for
the rolling friction coeﬃcient Cr , the drivetrain eﬃciency φ , the auxiliary power P, and the product Cd · ρ of the air drag
coeﬃcient and air density. Since the expected auxiliary power and air drag coeﬃcient are expected to be larger for a truck
than for a small passenger vehicle as the one considered by Asamer et al. (2016), we simply use the same ratio as these
authors between the worst-case and expected values to determine the worst-case associated with the expected values that
we used for these parameters. Finally, we assume that speed can be up to 20% larger or smaller than the expected value
of 45 km/h. Taking negative deviations from the expected value into account is only relevant for speed, since a lower speed
can increase the energy consumed by auxiliaries. All worst-case and expected values are reported in Table 12.
248                                 S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


      Table 13
      Best found solutions with uncertainty sets Uk5 , β = 0.01, and different energy consumption model parameters’ worst-case values used to com-
      pute aˆi j and ˆbi j .

                   Nominal             Rolling friction    Eﬃciency           Air drag + density     Aux. power           Speed          All

       Instance    Value       m       Value        m      Value       m      Value        m         Value        m       Value     m    Value     m

       1-10C       294.62      2       321.22       2      295.60      2      294.92       2         296.14       2       295.47    2    –         –
       2-10C       316.45      2       319.67       2      317.74      2      316.85       2         318.52       2       317.61    2    –         –
       3-10C       292.62      2       321.92       2      308.05      2      292.90       2         308.71       2       307.91    2    –         –
       4-10C       324.55      2       328.10       2      325.98      2      325.00       2         326.86       2       325.85    2    –         –
       5-10C       326.88      2       454.66       3      331.26      2      327.34       2         453.30       3       331.09    2    –         –
       1-20C       470.64      3       810.50       5      485.70      3      471.94       3         643.86       4       485.46    3    –         –
       2-20C       326.09      2       464.75       3      327.61      2      326.53       2         328.37       2       327.37    2    618.72    4
       3-20C       334.79      2       487.02       3      478.85      3      335.27       2         481.45       3       474.97    3    –         –
       4-20C       324.75      2       450.92       3      326.22      2      325.19       2         330.98       2       326.03    2    740.71    5
       5-20C       462.92      3       468.46       3      464.68      3      463.47       3         465.74       3       464.50    3    –         –
       1-40C       632.40      4       776.43       5      635.33      4      633.38       4         636.66       4       634.88    4    1067.69   7
       2-40C       999.64      6       –            –      –           –      –            –         –            –       –         –    –         –
       3-40C       632.39      4       797.54       5      635.50      4      633.18       4         636.83       4       635.04    4    –         –
       4-40C       473.03      3       602.32       4      480.53      3      473.62       3         600.08       4       480.14    3    754.02    5
       5-40C       639.31      4       805.68       5      657.43      4      648.99       4         788.59       5       654.53    4    –         –
       1-80C       931.18      6       944.38       6      937.60      6      932.37       6         939.41       6       936.92    6    1368.92   9
       2-80C       950.52      6       1112.50      7      962.75      6      954.08       6         1092.83      7       958.56    6    –         –
       3-80C       903.02      6       930.12       6      909.92      6      903.97       6         913.13       6       909.33    6    –         –
       4-80C       896.95      6       905.40       6      900.23      6      897.87       6         901.72       6       899.63    6    1063.97   7
       5-80C       943.82      6       1115.53      7      957.66      6      945.47       6         1093.24      7       952.12    6    –         –
       1-160C      1862.32     12      –            –      2044.35     13     1882.35      12        2212.61      14      1925.58   12   –         –
       2-160C      1777.43     12      1797.75      12     1783.85     12     1779.29      12        1786.55      12      1783.43   12   –         –
       3-160C      1670.80     11      1688.33      11     1677.96     11     1673.31      11        1680.70      11      1676.43   11   –         –
       4-160C      1684.96     11      2008.80      13     1695.96     11     1688.70      11        1715.66      11      1695.12   11   –         –
       5-160C      1729.75     11      –            –      1891.51     12     1738.36      11        2082.22      13      1884.05   12   –         –
       1-320C      3780.68     24      –            –      –           –      4013.81      25        –            –       –         –    –         –
       2-320C      3217.63     22      3246.29      22     3225.12     22     3219.12      22        3232.37      22      3226.28   22   –         –
       3-320C      3379.40     22      –            –      3600.21     23     3413.40      22        4054.46      26      3567.40   23   –         –
       4-320C      3341.18     22      3633.12      24     3436.38     23     3357.65      22        3481.36      23      3425.16   23   –         –
       5-320C      3294.02     22      3520.89      23     3317.11     22     3297.40      22        3335.57      22      3308.58   22   –         –




   We either change the instances by determining aˆi j and ˆbi j with the worst-case value of only one parameter in the energy
consumption model (two in the case of the product Cd · ρ ) and with the expected values of the rest, or with the worst-case
values of all parameters simultaneously. All experiments were run using the ellipsoidal uncertainty sets Uk5 with the initial
correlation level of 0.9 between the components of Zk and with a protection level of β = 0.01. The best found solutions over
10 runs are reported in Table 13 for each case, as well as for the previously solved nominal scenario with no uncertainty. For
example, column “Rolling friction” reports best found solutions when aˆi j and ˆbi j are computed with the worst-case value
of Cr , and with expected values for Cd , P, ρ , φ and speed. Note that when traveling at constant speeds (as is the case in
our EVRP-ECU instances), the worst-case energy consumption of an arc will always be attained with the smallest or largest
possible speed. For an arc (i, j) of length dij traveled entirely at a constant speed of vij , let Bij (vij ) refer to the portion of the
energy consumption when traveling (i, j) that is dependent on vij . Eqs. (1) and (2) allow expressing Bij (vij ) as

                                                                                                                     
                           1                                           1                                di j
       Bi j ( vi j ) =             0.5φ ACd ρv2i j di j + P · ti j =           0.5φ ACd ρv2i j di j + P ·      ,
                       3.6 · 106                                     3.6 · 106                            vi j

which is a convex function of vij for vij > 0 when all other parameters are ﬁxed. Therefore, for the cases of (1) taking the
worst-case value of speed and the expected values of the other uncertain parameters, and (2) taking the worst-case values
of all parameters simultaneously, we either use the minimal or maximal speed for each arc to determine aˆi j and bˆ i j (i.e.,
the one that maximizes Bij (vij ) for that arc).
   Taking all worst-case values simultaneously to compute aˆi j and ˆbi j appears to render most instances infeasible (see
column “All”). When this is not the case, the best found solution cost is signiﬁcantly deteriorated compared to that of
the nominal case. However, taking worst-case values of the parameters one at a time to compute aˆi j and bˆ i j shows that
the uncertainty of the rolling friction coeﬃcient seems to have the largest impact on solutions, which is line with the
ﬁndings of Asamer et al. (2016) in their sensitivity analysis of the energy consumption model parameters. The uncertainty
surrounding the auxiliary power, the drivetrain eﬃciency and the travel speed also seems to have a considerable impact for
a few instances, while the uncertainty of the air drag coeﬃcient and of the air density seems to be less inﬂuential.
                                  S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255                              249


7. Conclusions

    The goal of this study was to introduce and solve the EVRP-ECU, a practical transportation problem that can deal with the
presence of uncertainties surrounding the energy consumption of EFVs without being overly conservative. We have modeled
the problem within a robust optimization framework, and we have developed a two-phase metaheuristic to solve it. We
have also implemented two exact robust optimization methods that can be used to solve small instances of the problem
to optimality. We have adapted existing instances to generate new instances for the EVRP-ECU and we have run several
numerical experiments on them with different types of uncertainty sets. We have shown that the solution method performs
extremely well on small instances of the EVRP-ECU by comparing it to solutions obtained with the exact methods. Moreover,
we have tested our heuristic on existing instances of the related RCVRP, and found 42 new best solutions in the process.
Our computational study has also illustrated how the EVRP-ECU can help reach the right balance between cost and risk, and
has shown the inﬂuence of different uncertain parameters and of their correlation with each other on robust solutions. We
have also demonstrated the importance of taking energy consumption uncertainties into account by comparing nominal to
robust solutions.
    We believe that promising research avenues lie in the integration of additional features in the problem. These may
include, for example, the use of other types of uncertainty sets. One natural extension could be to incorporate en route
recharging into the problem to render it applicable to EVRPs in mid- and long-haul contexts. Finally, the development of
new solution methods for the EVRP-ECU would be welcome in order to have more available benchmark solutions for the
larger instances.



Acknowledgements

   This research was partly supported by the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council under grants
463834-2014, 436014-2013 and 2015-06189. This support is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are also due to Erick Delage
and Fan E for their valuable feedback in the early stages of this work. The authors also thank the associate editor and the
referees for their valuable comments.



Appendix A. Detailed results for the CVRP and RCVRP benchmark instances




Table A.1
Results for the set A of CVRP instances from Augerat (1995) and the associated RCVRP instances from Gounaris et al. (2013).

               CVRP                                            RCVRP-UQ1                                        RCVRP-UQ2

 Instance      BFS     Avg.      Time (s)    BKS      G (%)    BFS     Avg.        Time (s)    BKS     G (%)    BFS     Avg.        Time (s)   BKS     G (%)
                                                 ∗                                                ∗                                               ∗
 A-n32-k05     784     784.00    18.13       784      0.00     748     748.00      24.39       748     0.00     748     748.00      29.25      748     0.00
 A-n33-k05     661     661.00    16.42       661∗     0.00     642     642.00      19.57       642∗    0.00     631     631.00      20.46      631∗    0.00
 A-n33-k06     742     742.00    15.30       742∗     0.00     717     717.00      17.84       717∗    0.00     710     710.00      18.71      710∗    0.00
 A-n34-k05     778     778.00    17.81       778∗     0.00     715     716.50      18.87       715∗    0.00     702     702.00      20.43      702∗    0.00
 A-n36-k05     799     799.00    26.97       799∗     0.00     755     755.00      29.99       755∗    0.00     766     767.80      38.75      766∗    0.00
 A-n37-k05     669     669.00    24.15       669∗     0.00     650     650.00      31.69       650∗    0.00     648     648.00      42.71      648∗    0.00
 A-n37-k06     949     949.00    23.50       949∗     0.00     892     892.00      25.86       892∗    0.00     892     892.00      28.72      892∗    0.00
 A-n38-k05     730     730.00    23.20       730∗     0.00     704     705.60      29.54       704∗    0.00     693     693.00      31.37      693∗    0.00
 A-n39-k05     822     822.00    27.43       822∗     0.00     777     789.50      35.87       777∗    0.00     772     778.50      36.31      772∗    0.00
 A-n39-k06     831     831.20    27.32       831∗     0.00     787     787.00      34.01       787∗    0.00     786     786.00      39.42      786∗    0.00
 A-n44-k06     937     937.00    36.45       937∗     0.00     909     910.60      45.08       909     0.00     892     892.00      51.34      892∗    0.00
 A-n45-k06     944     945.70    36.13       944∗     0.00     896     897.00      42.29       896∗    0.00     891     892.20      47.15      891∗    0.00
 A-n46-k07     914     914.00    40.56       914∗     0.00     888     888.60      50.64       888∗    0.00     883     883.00      57.11      883∗    0.00
 A-n48-k07     1073    1073.00   49.59       1073∗    0.00     1033    1033.00     93.00       1033    0.00     1033    1033.00     115.74     1033    0.00
 A-n53-k07     1010    1010.00   57.52       1010∗    0.00     974     974.00      100.70      974     0.00     967     967.00      147.82     967∗    0.00
 A-n54-k07     1167    1167.00   60.73       1167∗    0.00     1106    1106.50     98.77       1106    0.00     1097    1099.80     138.11     1097    0.00
 A-n55-k09     1073    1073.00   60.12       1073∗    0.00     1030    1030.30     74.22       1030    0.00     1007    10 07.0 0   74.63      1007∗   0.00
 A-n60-k09     1354    1354.00   107.61      1354∗    0.00     1280    1280.00     105.61      1280    0.00     1264    1264.20     115.34     1264    0.00
 A-n61-k09     1034    1034.00   76.40       1034∗    0.00     983     983.00      113.32      983     0.00     974     974.00      105.62     974     0.00
 A-n62-k08     1288    1288.20   222.46      1288∗    0.00     1219    1221.00     236.04      1214    0.41     1201    1202.40     275.79     1201    0.00
 A-n63-k09     1616    1616.00   103.07      1616∗    0.00     1505    1505.00     163.48      1505    0.00     1498    1501.40     237.72     1498    0.00
 A-n63-k10     1314    1315.50   112.22      1314∗    0.00     1236    1237.60     94.07       1240    0.00     1222    1222.20     95.33      1222    0.00
 A-n64-k09     1401    1401.50   135.76      1401∗    0.00     1325    1326.00     137.09      1325    0.00     1314    1314.00     153.51     1314    0.00
 A-n65-k09     1174    1175.50   77.02       1174∗    0.00     1106    1106.00     111.98      1106    0.00     1094    1094.00     108.32     1094∗   0.00
 A-n69-k09     1159    1159.00   120.38      1159∗    0.00     1109    1109.50     143.05      1109    0.00     1096    1096.00     139.88     1096    0.00
 A-n80-k10     1763    1764.10   299.82      1763∗    0.00     1662    1669.10     194.22      1662    0.00     1644    1650.90     222.99     1645    0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                           250




                                                                                                                                                                                           S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
Table A.2
Results for the set B of CVRP instances from Augerat (1995) and the associated RCVRP instances from Gounaris et al. (2013).

                  CVRP                                                            RCVRP-UQ1                                               RCVRP-UQ2

 Instance         BFS        Avg.           Time (s)      BKS         G (%)       BFS         Avg.         Time (s)       BKS     G (%)   BFS         Avg.      Time (s)   BKS     G (%)

 B-n31-k05        672        672.00         15.63         672∗        0.00        651         651.00       20.25          651∗    0.00    651         651.00    22.71      651∗    0.00
 B-n34-k05        788        788.00         19.34         788∗        0.00        768         768.00       20.41          768     0.00    748∗        752.90    21.68      748     0.00
 B-n35-k05        955        955.00         18.86         955∗        0.00        883         883.00       20.81          883∗    0.00    883         883.10    22.51      883∗    0.00
 B-n38-k06        805        805.00         33.08         805∗        0.00        729         729.00       26.62          729∗    0.00    729         729.00    28.86      729∗    0.00
 B-n39-k05        549        549.00         29.04         549∗        0.00        532         535.60       51.36          532∗    0.00    529         532.00    57.80      529∗    0.00
 B-n41-k06        829        829.00         32.76         829∗        0.00        796         796.20       59.78          796∗    0.00    791         791.00    72.95      791∗    0.00
 B-n43-k06        742        742.00         55.94         742∗        0.00        681         681.00       51.22          681∗    0.00    680         680.00    63.62      680∗    0.00
 B-n44-k07        909        909.00         48.35         909∗        0.00        835         835.00       49.19          835∗    0.00    835         835.00    61.49      835∗    0.00
 B-n45-k05        751        751.00         37.07         751∗        0.00        701         701.00       66.95          701     0.00    680         682.90    67.75      680∗    0.00
 B-n45-k06        678        678.00         38.78         678∗        0.00        660         660.00       294.60         660∗    0.00    657         657.40    344.46     657∗    0.00
 B-n50-k07        741        741.00         48.82         741∗        0.00        679         679.00       54.88          679∗    0.00    699         699.00    64.72      699∗    0.00
 B-n50-k08        1312       1312.50        138.91        1312∗       0.00        1224        1224.80      142.06         1224    0.00    1217        1217.50   312.81     1217    0.00
 B-n51-k07        1032       1032.00        63.58         1032∗       0.00        962         964.00       47.99          961     0.10    928         928.00    48.62      928∗    0.00
 B-n52-k07        747        747.00         176.35        747∗        0.00        675         675.00       60.89          675∗    0.00    670         670.00    65.35      670∗    0.00
 B-n56-k07        707        708.50         372.55        707∗        0.00        623         623.00       88.31          623∗    0.00    623         623.00    105.00     623∗    0.00
 B-n57-k07        1153       1156.50        64.56         1153∗       0.00        1055        1055.00      77.57          1055    0.00    1052        1053.10   80.85      1052    0.00
 B-n57-k09        1598       1598.00        82.23         1598∗       0.00        1555        1557.20      179.84         1540∗   0.96    1539        1540.00   101.63     1539∗   0.00
 B-n63-k10        1496       1496.00        91.53         1496∗       0.00        1407        1407.00      95.74          1407    0.00    1405        1405.00   119.60     1405    0.00
 B-n64-k09        861        861.00         83.43         861∗        0.00        803         803.00       94.89          803∗    0.00    803         803.00    115.02     803∗    0.00
 B-n66-k09        1316       1316.80        376.44        1316∗       0.00        1251        1256.50      430.13         1251    0.00    1210∗       1210.00   201.57     1210    0.00
 B-n67-k10        1032       1032.00        119.55        1032∗       0.00        1007        1007.40      137.82         1007    0.00    1001        1001.90   169.39     1001    0.00
 B-n68-k09        1272       1273.20        407.20        1272∗       0.00        1205        1214.80      428.27         1213    0.00    1191        1195.20   398.65     1191    0.00
 B-n78-k10        1221       1226.60        465.87        1221∗       0.00        1131        1131.60      199.20         1131    0.00    1130        1130.60   241.24     1130    0.00
Table A.3




                                                                                                                                                                                            S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
Results for the set P of CVRP instances from Augerat (1995) and the associated RCVRP instances from Gounaris et al. (2013).

                    CVRP                                                           RCVRP-UQ1                                                 RCVRP-UQ2

 Instance           BFS       Avg.          Time (s)       BKS         G (%)       BFS         Avg.         Time (s)          BKS    G (%)   BFS         Avg.     Time (s)   BKS    G (%)

 P-n16-k08          450       450.00        2.11           450∗        0.00        439         439.00       3.05              439∗   0.00    439         439.00   2.92       439∗   0.00
 P-n19-k02          212       212.00        3.68           212∗        0.00        195         195.00       5.94              195∗   0.00    195         195.00   7.00       195∗   0.00
 P-n20-k02          216       216.00        5.04           216∗        0.00        208         208.00       7.20              208∗   0.00    208         208.00   8.27       208∗   0.00
 P-n21-k02          211       211.00        6.38           211∗        0.00        208         208.00       9.12              208∗   0.00    208         208.00   10.78      208∗   0.00
 P-n22-k02          216       216.00        6.54           216∗        0.00        213         213.00       9.66              213∗   0.00    213         213.00   11.59      213∗   0.00
 P-n22-k08          603       603.00        5.38           603∗        0.00        537         537.00       5.72              537∗   0.00    557         557.00   5.48       557∗   0.00
 P-n23-k08          529       529.00        4.96           529∗        0.00        504         504.00       7.84              504    0.00    503         503.00   7.37       503    0.00
 P-n40-k05          458       458.00        23.46          458∗        0.00        447         447.00       28.87             447∗   0.00    447         447.00   33.41      447∗   0.00
 P-n45-k05          510       510.00        34.36          510∗        0.00        501         501.30       35.76             501∗   0.00    494         494.40   42.63      494∗   0.00
 P-n50-k07          554       554.00        42.62          554∗        0.00        539         539.80       59.89             539    0.00    537         537.10   67.53      537    0.00
 P-n50-k08          631       633.40        42.48          631∗        0.00        592         592.00       45.14             592    0.00    588         588.00   45.70      588    0.00
 P-n50-k10          696       696.00        38.75          696∗        0.00        656         656.00       48.14             656    0.00    656         656.00   47.51      656    0.00
 P-n51-k10          741       741.00        44.22          741∗        0.00        707         707.00       52.59             707    0.00    698         698.00   53.04      698    0.00
 P-n55-k07          568       568.00        61.94          568∗        0.00        549         549.00       79.96             549    0.00    544         544.40   83.43      544∗   0.00
 P-n55-k08          588       588.00        59.38          588∗        0.00        572         572.00       73.71             572    0.00    568         568.10   81.79      568    0.00
 P-n55-k10          694       694.00        58.61          694∗        0.00        670         670.00       62.56             670    0.00    657         657.00   61.14      657    0.00
 P-n55-k15          989       989.00        45.24          989∗        0.00        889         889.00       54.61             889    0.00    877         877.00   51.38      877    0.00
 P-n60-k10          744       744.00        62.99          744∗        0.00        712         712.00       71.52             712    0.00    705         705.00   73.46      705    0.00
 P-n60-k15          968       968.00        58.72          968∗        0.00        931         931.00       74.77             931    0.00    916         916.00   72.09      916    0.00
 P-n65-k10          792       792.00        83.20          792∗        0.00        765         765.20       85.78             765    0.00    761         761.50   90.67      761    0.00
 P-n70-k10          827       827.00        104.02         827∗        0.00        785         785.10       134.14            797    0.00    783         783.70   132.73     783    0.00
 P-n76-k04          593       593.70        147.57         593∗        0.00        590         590.00       248.04            590∗   0.00    590         590.00   290.54     590∗   0.00
 P-n76-k05          627       627.30        136.09         627∗        0.00        616         616.00       223.48            616    0.00    615         615.00   263.13     615    0.00
 P-n101-k04         681       681.00        284.68         681∗        0.00        673         673.00       240.19            673∗   0.00    673         673.00   274.40     673∗   0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                            251
                                                                                                                                                                                          252




                                                                                                                                                                                          S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
Table A.4
Results for the sets E, M, and F of CVRP instances and the associated RCVRP instances from Gounaris et al. (2013).

                    CVRP                                                             RCVRP-UQ1                                          RCVRP-UQ2

 Instance           BFS        Avg.           Time (s)       BKS         G (%)       BFS         Avg.         Time (s)   BKS    G (%)   BFS         Avg.        Time (s)   BKS    G (%)
                                                                ∗                                                           ∗                                                ∗
 E-n22-k04          375        375.00         5.66           375         0.00        373         373.00       8.45       373    0.00    373         373.00      8.46       373    0.00
 E-n23-k03          569        569.00         11.42          569∗        0.00        563         563.00       16.72      563∗   0.00    544         544.00      16.75      544∗   0.00
 E-n30-k03          534        534.00         16.43          534∗        0.00        475         475.00       18.79      475∗   0.00    492         492.00      19.06      492∗   0.00
 E-n33-k04          835        835.00         22.22          835∗        0.00        814         814.00       44.44      814∗   0.00    814         814.00      38.15      814∗   0.00
 E-n51-k05          521        521.00         46.95          521∗        0.00        516         516.00       70.48      516∗   0.00    516         516.00      83.10      516∗   0.00
 E-n76-k07          682        682.00         168.33         682∗        0.00        661         661.00       226.48     661    0.00    661         661.00      236.24     661    0.00
 E-n76-k08          735        735.50         143.76         735∗        0.00        709         709.70       173.48     709    0.00    700         70 0.0 0    185.40     700    0.00
 E-n76-k10          830        830.20         137.28         830∗        0.00        796         796.10       165.91     796    0.00    782         782.00      170.14     782    0.00
 E-n76-k14          1021       1021.00        128.38         1021∗       0.00        952         952.00       132.49     952    0.00    952         952.00      136.84     952    0.00
 E-n101-k08         815        816.20         296.91         815∗        0.00        789         789.30       229.77     789    0.00    783         784.50      213.22     783    0.00
 E-n101-k14         1067       1068.70        385.58         1067∗       0.00        1011        1011.10      246.24     1011   0.00    1009        10 09.0 0   234.23     1009   0.00
 F-n45-k04          724        724.40         58.20          724∗        0.00        718         718.50       73.17      718∗   0.00    714         714.80      77.75      714∗   0.00
 F-n72-k04          237        237.00         180.88         237∗        0.00        232         232.00       205.54     232∗   0.00    232         232.00      210.91     232∗   0.00
 F-n135-k07         1162       1162.00        464.69         1162∗       0.00        1136        1144.50      696.67     1129   0.62    1086        1087.20     440.14     1086   0.00
 M-n101-k10         820        820.00         113.01         820∗        0.00        809         809.10       186.06     809∗   0.00    804         804.80      186.25     804∗   0.00
 M-n121-k07         1034       1043.90        147.03         1034∗       0.00        1001        1027.00      862.91     994    0.70    990         994.00      550.74     982    0.81
 M-n151-k12         1015       1024.00        983.11         1015∗       0.00        989         994.10       1077.24    993    0.00    971         982.90      907.54     986    0.00
Table A.5
Results for the Christoﬁdes et al. (1979) and Golden et al. (1998) CVRP instances and the associated RCVRP instances from Gounaris et al. (2016).

                      CVRP                                                           RCVRP-UQ1                                                      RCVRP-UQ2

 Instance     n       BFS           Avg.         Time (s)     BKS          G (%)     BFS          Avg.          Time (s)    BKS           G (%)     BFS         Avg.       Time (s)   BKS        G (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255
 C1           50      524.61        524.61       43.65        524.61∗      0.00      519.43       519.43        71.87       519.43        0.00      519.43      519.43     94.84      519.43     0.00
 C2           75      835.26        835.26       152.82       835.26∗      0.00      799.05       799.42        205.03      807.15        0.00      785.86      785.86     192.69     785.86     0.00
 C3           100     826.14        826.77       322.33       826.14∗      0.00      801.29       802.35        274.89      803.33        0.00      794.52      796.23     232.52     794.52     0.00
 C4           150     1030.83       1032.22      1368.24      1028.42∗     0.23      997.33       1008.01       1291.08     1012.80       0.00      982.36      987.38     880.97     1006.33    0.00
 C5           199     1295.99       1311.80      1575.52      1291.29∗     0.36      1251.29      1262.35       1305.09     1254.38       0.00      1236.42     1243.71    1245.61    1243.27    0.00
 C6           50      555.43        555.43       48.04        555.43       0.00      555.43       555.43        70.79       555.43        0.00      555.43      555.43     66.87      555.43     0.00
 C7           75      909.68        909.68       126.95       909.68       0.00      902.01       902.01        167.77      902.01        0.00      900.12      901.02     182.46     901.40     0.00
 C8           100     865.94        865.94       447.79       865.94       0.00      865.50       865.50        914.11      865.50        0.00      865.50      865.50     912.79     865.50     0.00
 C9           150     1163.85       1165.81      1549.10      1162.55      0.11      1161.85      1164.51       1671.63     1167.06       0.00      1163.48     1165.74    1651.34    1163.81    0.00
 C10          199     1408.23       1412.73      2728.72      1395.85      0.88      1389.07      1397.92       3138.75     1412.10       0.00      1387.00     1397.01    2853.88    1410.65    0.00
 C11          120     1042.12       1047.95      188.04       1042.11∗     0.00      1005.92      1007.23       852.08      1005.10       0.08      10 0 0.35   1002.73    782.37     994.63     0.57
 C12          100     819.56        819.56       124.34       819.56∗      0.00      808.90       809.45        218.83      808.90        0.00      804.08      804.19     218.13     804.08     0.00
 C13          120     1546.76       1555.54      1315.67      1541.14      0.36      1545.96      1559.92       1383.64     1547.06       0.00      1542.86     1556.15    1250.93    1544.90    0.00
 C14          100     866.37        866.37       381.22       866.37       0.00      847.43       847.46        455.82      847.43        0.00      835.11      835.11     338.51     835.11     0.00
 G1           240     5644.44       5669.78      2860.50      5623.47      0.37      5618.59      5634.48       3291.12     5694.68       0.00      5636.22     5637.04    3220.34    5698.06    0.00
 G2           320     8447.92       8452.06      3315.92      8404.61      0.51      8447.92      8450.64       3638.16     8557.12       0.00      8447.92     8452.56    3779.75    8544.31    0.00
 G3           400     11036.22      11051.80     5578.05      11036.22     0.00      11036.22     11047.30      5279.53     11362.36      0.00      11036.22    11072.00   5581.29    11423.06   0.00
 G4           480     13624.53      13648.90     6698.06      13592.88     0.23      13624.52     13625.60      7729.72     14134.17      0.00      13624.53    13630.60   7774.88    13975.76   0.00
 G5           200     6460.98       6460.98      965.03       6460.98      0.00      6460.98      6460.98       1083.11     6466.68       0.00      6460.98     6462.12    1311.87    6460.98    0.00
 G6           280     8412.90       8412.95      2767.71      8404.26      0.10      8412.90      8412.99       3306.22     8414.28       0.00      8412.67     8412.88    3646.73    8415.21    0.00
 G7           360     10195.59      10195.59     3901.31      10102.68     0.91      10195.59     10195.59      4202.26     10266.87      0.00      10195.59    10197.2    4054.57    10203.57   0.00
 G8           440     11828.78      11835.70     8370.14      11635.34     1.64      11744.95     11840.40      7155.05     12078.23      0.00      11727.83    11817.9    7410.79    12074.27   0.00
 G9           255     588.58        590.50       1831.82      579.71       1.51      572.63       575.79        1098.56     570.63        0.35      557.86      567.99     1334.58    562.65     0.00
 G10          323     752.03        755.92       1875.66      736.26       2.10      –            –             –           736.41        –         –           –          –          724.61     –
 G11          399     930.20        940.33       2183.79      912.84       1.87      –            –             –           925.88        –         –           –          –          912.17     –
 G12          483     1138.07       1144.33      2707.28      1102.69      3.11      –            –             –           1181.15       –         –           –          –          1114.85    –
 G13          252     862.26        871.62       1727.59      857.19       0.59      830.95       837.80        907.50      844.05        0.00      825.21      830.72     1038.67    838.49     0.00
 G14          320     1101.57       1113.68      1638.26      1080.55∗     1.91      1079.85      1089.67       1084.33     1080.59       0.00      1060.31     1074.00    638.75     1070.32    0.00
 G15          396     1370.82       1380.98      1929.40      1337.92      2.40      1345.99      1362.28       1594.79     1341.21       0.36      1312.29     1334.07    1216.22    1331.96    0.00
 G16          480     1674.86       1684.75      2253.96      1612.50      3.72      –            –             –           1641.95       –         1600.30     1611.8     2340.29    1629.12    0.00
 G17          240     708.68        711.38       2076.74      707.76∗      0.13      705.89       708.79        1747.90     713.68        0.00      690.60      692.90     1226.74    701.42     0.00
 G18          300     1013.33       1017.71      3032.46      995.13∗      1.80      –            –             –           1012.90       –         –           –          –          991.54     –
 G19          360     1385.04       1395.61      2056.09      1365.60∗     1.40      –            –             –           1389.32       –         –           –          –          1369.57    –
 G20          420     1860.91       1902.05      2026.15      1818.32      2.29      –            –             –           1860.84       –         –           –          –          1827.02    –




                                                                                                                                                                                                         253
254                                  S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255


References

Agra, A., Christiansen, M., Figueiredo, R., Hvattum, L.M., Poss, M., Requejo, C., 2013. The robust vehicle routing problem with time windows. Comput. Oper.
     Res. 40 (3), 856–866.
Asamer, J., Graser, A., Heilmann, B., Ruthmair, M., 2016. Sensitivity analysis for energy demand estimation of electric vehicles. Transp. Res. Part D Transp.
     Environ. 46, 182–199.
Augerat, P., 1995. Approche polyèdrale du problème de tournées de véhicules. Ph.D. thesis. Institut National Polytechnique de Grenoble, France.
Bandi, C., Bertsimas, D., 2012. Tractable stochastic analysis in high dimensions via robust optimization. Math. Program. 134 (1), 23–70.
Barth, M., Younglove, T., Scora, G., 2005. Development of a heavy-duty diesel modal emissions and fuel consumption model. California PATH Program,
     Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California at Berkeley.
Basso, R., Kulcsár, B., Egardt, B., Lindroth, P., Sanchez-Diaz, I., 2019. Energy consumption estimation integrated into the electric vehicle routing problem.
     Transp. Res. Part D Transp. Environ. 69, 141–167.
Bektaş, T., Laporte, G., 2011. The pollution-routing problem. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 45 (8), 1232–1250.
Ben-Tal, A., El Ghaoui, L., Nemirovski, A., 2009. Robust optimization. Princeton Series in Applied Mathematics. (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Bertsimas, D., Dunning, I., Lubin, M., 2016. Reformulation versus cutting-planes for robust optimization: a computational study. Comput. Manag. Sci. 13 (2),
     195–217.
Bertsimas, D., Gupta, V., Kallus, N., 2018. Data-driven robust optimization. Math. Program. 167 (2), 235–292.
Bingham, C., Walsh, C., Carroll, S., 2012. Impact of driving characteristics on electric vehicle energy consumption and range. IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 6 (1),
     29–35.
Braaten, S., nnes, O.G., Hvattum, L.M., Tirado, G., 2017. Heuristics for the robust vehicle routing problem with time windows. Expert Syst. Appl. 77, 136–147.
Christoﬁdes, N., Eilon, S., 1969. An algorithm for the vehicle-dispatching problem. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 20 (3), 309–318.
Christoﬁdes, N., Mingozzi, A., Toth, P., 1979. The vehicle routing problem. In: Christoﬁdes, N., Mingozzi, A., Toth, P., Sandi, C. (Eds.), Combinatorial Optimiza-
     tion. (Wiley, Chichester, UK), pp. 315–338.
Clarke, G., Wright, J.W., 1964. Scheduling of vehicles from a central depot to a number of delivery points. Oper. Res. 12 (4), 568–581.
Conrad, R.G., Figliozzi, M.A., 2011. The recharging vehicle routing problem. In: Doolen, T., Aken, E.V. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Industrial Engineering Research
     Conference, pp. 2785–2792. (Institute of Industrial Engineers, Norcross, GA).
Davis, B.A., Figliozzi, M.A., 2013. A methodology to evaluate the competitiveness of electric delivery trucks. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 49 (1),
     8–23.
Demir, E., Bektaş, T., Laporte, G., 2012. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pollution-routing problem. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 223 (2), 346–359.
El Ghaoui, L., Oks, M., Oustry, F., 2003. Worst-case value-at-risk and robust portfolio optimization: a conic programming approach. Oper. Res. 51 (4),
     543–556.
Felipe, A., no, M.T.O., Righini, G., Tirado, G., 2014. A heuristic approach for the green vehicle routing problem with multiple technologies and partial
     recharges. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 71, 111–128.
Feng, W., Figliozzi, M., 2013. An economic and technological analysis of the key factors affecting the competitiveness of electric commercial vehicles: a case
     study from the USA market. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 26, 135–145.
Fisher, M., 1994. Optimal solution of vehicle routing problems using minimum k-trees. Oper. Res. 42 (4), 626–642.
Fontana, M.W., 2013. Optimal routes for electric vehicles facing uncertainty, congestion, and energy constraints. Ph.D. thesis. Massachusetts Institute of
     Technology, Massachusetts.
Gendreau, M., Jabali, O., Rei, W., 2016. 50th anniversary invited article: future research directions in stochastic vehicle routing. Transp. Sci. 50 (4), 1163–1173.
Goeke, D., Schneider, M., 2015. Routing a mixed ﬂeet of electric and conventional vehicles. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 245 (1), 81–99.
Golden, B.L., Wasil, E.A., Kelly, J.P., Chao, I.-M., 1998. The impact of metaheuristics on solving the vehicle routing problem: algorithms, problem sets, and
     computational results. In: Crainic, T.G., Laporte, G. (Eds.), Fleet Management and Logistics. (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA), pp. 33–56.
Gounaris, C.E., Repoussis, P.P., Tarantilis, C.D., Wiesemann, W., Floudas, C.A., 2016. An adaptive memory programming framework for the robust capacitated
     vehicle routing problem. Transp. Sci. 50 (4), 1239–1260.
Gounaris, C.E., Wiesemann, W., Floudas, C.A., 2013. The robust capacitated vehicle routing problem under demand uncertainty. Oper. Res. 61 (3), 677–693.
Hiermann, G., Hartl, R.F., Puchinger, J., Vidal, T., 2019. Routing a mix of conventional, plug-in hybrid, and electric vehicles. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 272 (1), 235–248.
Hiermann, G., Puchinger, J., Ropke, S., Hartl, R.F., 2016. The electric ﬂeet size and mix vehicle routing problem with time windows and recharging stations.
     Eur. J. Oper. Res. 252 (3), 995–1018.
Hu, C., Lu, J., Liu, X., Zhang, G., 2018. Robust vehicle routing problem with hard time windows under demand and travel time uncertainty. Comput. Oper.
     Res. 94, 139–153.
Ilyina, A., 2017. Combinatorial optimization under ellipsoidal uncertainty. Ph.D. thesis. Technical University of Dortmund, Germany.
Jabali, O., Woensel, T.V., de Kok, A.G., 2012. Analysis of travel times and CO2 emissions in time-dependent vehicle routing. Prod. Oper. Manag. 21 (6),
     1060–1074.
Jalilvand-Nejad, A., Shafaei, R., Shahriar, H., 2016. Robust optimization under correlated polyhedral uncertainty set. Comput. Ind. Eng. 92, 82–94.
Laporte, G., Louveaux, F.V., 1993. The integer l-shaped method for stochastic integer programs with complete recourse. Oper. Res. Lett. 13, 133–142.
Lebeau, P., De Cauwer, C., Mierlo, J.V., Macharis, C., Verbeke, W., Coosemans, T., 2015. Conventional, hybrid, or electric vehicles: which technology for an
     urban distribution centre? Sci. World J 2015. Article ID 302867, 11 pages.
Lee, C., Lee, K., Park, S., 2012. Robust vehicle routing problem with deadlines and travel time/demand uncertainty. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 63 (9), 1294–1306.
Lee, D.Y., Thomas, V.M., Brown, M.A., 2013. Electric urban delivery trucks: energy use, greenhouse gas emissions, and cost-effectiveness. Environ. Sci. Tech-
     nol. 47 (14), 8022–8030.
Lunz, B., Yan, Z., Gerschler, J.B., Sauer, D.U., 2012. Inﬂuence of plug-in hybrid electric vehicle charging strategies on charging and battery degradation costs.
     Energy Policy 46, 511–519.
Mendoza, J.E., Rousseau, L.-M., Villegas, J.G., 2016. A hybrid metaheuristic for the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demand and duration constraints.
     J. Heuristics 22 (4), 539–566.
Mendoza, J.E., Villegas, J.G., 2013. A multi-space sampling heuristic for the vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands. Optim. Lett. 17 (7), 1503–1516.
Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J.E., Villegas, J.G., 2016. A modiﬁed multi space sampling heuristic for the green vehicle routing problem. Transp. Res.
     Part C Emerg. Technol. 70, 113–128.
Montoya, A., Guéret, C., Mendoza, J.E., Villegas, J.G., 2017. The electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging function. Transp. Res. Part B
     Methodol. 103, 87–110.
Morganti, E., Browne, M., 2018. Technical and operational obstacles to the adoption of electric vans in france and the UK: an operator perspective. Transp.
     Policy 63, 90–97.
Naberezhnykh, D., Wardle, J., Lowes, J., Herron, C., Brightman, T., Parker, T., 2012. Electric vehicle charging points for freight vehicles in central London
     (version – ﬁnal 1.0). Prepared for Central London FQP by Transport & Travel Research Ltd, in partnership with TRL and Zero Carbon Futures. http:
     //www.centrallondonfqp.org/app/download/12240926/CLFQP_EVCP_strategy+report_Final+v1+0.pdf. Last accessed June 2019.
NSR, E.-M., 2013. Comparative analysis of european examples of schemes for freight electric vehicles – compilation report. http://e- mobility- nsr.eu/
     ﬁleadmin/user_upload/downloads/info- pool/E- Mobility_- _Final_report_7.3.pdf. Last accessed June 2019.
Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., Laporte, G., 2016. 50th anniversary invited article – goods distribution with electric vehicles: review and research perspectives. Transp.
     Sci. 50 (1), 3–22.
Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., Laporte, G., 2018. Charge scheduling for electric freight vehicles. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 115, 246–269.
                                    S. Pelletier, O. Jabali and G. Laporte / Transportation Research Part B 126 (2019) 225–255                                255


Pelletier, S., Jabali, O., Laporte, G., Veneroni, M., 2017. Battery degradation and behaviour for electric vehicles: review and numerical analyses of several
     models. Transp. Res. Part B Methodol. 103, 158–187.
Poss, M., 2013. Robust combinatorial optimization with variable budgeted uncertainty. 4OR 11 (1), 75–92.
Potvin, J.Y., Rousseau, J.M., 1995. An exchange heuristic for routeing problems with time windows. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 46 (12), 1433–1446.
Preis, H., Frank, S., Nachtigall, K., 2014. Energy-optimized routing of electric vehicles in urban delivery systems. In: Helber, S., Breitner, M., Rösch, D.,
     Schön, C., von der Schulenburg, J.-M. G., Sibbertsen, P., Steinbach, M., Weber, S., Wolter, A. (Eds.), Proceedings of the Operations Research. (Springer
     International Publishing, Switzerland), pp. 583–588.
Quak, H., Koffrie, R., van Rooijen, T., Nesterova, N., 2017. Project FREVUE deliverable d3.2: Economics of electric vehicles for city logistics. TNO. In: Proceed-
     ings of the European Commission Seventh Framework Programme.
Ropke, S., Pisinger, D., 2006. An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transp. Sci. 40 (4),
     455–472.
Schiffer, M., Walther, G., 2017. The electric location routing problem with time windows and partial recharging. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 260 (3), 995–1013.
Schiffer, M., Walther, G., 2018. Strategic planning of electric logistics networks: a robust location routing approach. Omega 80, 31–42.
Schneider, M., Stenger, A., Goeke, D., 2014. The electric vehicle-routing problem with time windows and recharging stations. Transp. Sci. 48 (4), 500–520.
Shaw, P., 1998. Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve vehicle routing problems. In: Maher, M., Puget, J.-F. (Eds.), Proceedings of
     the 4th International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg), pp. 417–431. Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, Vol. 1520.
Sungur, I., Ordóñez, F., Dessouky, M., 2008. A robust optimization approach for the capacitated vehicle routing problem with demand uncertainty. IIE Trans.
     40 (5), 509–523.
Tretvik, T., Cerasi, I.R., Dahl, E., 2017. Project FREVUE deliverable d3.1: technical suitability of EVs for logistics. SINTEF. In: Proceedings of the European
     Commission Seventh Framework Programme.
Yi, Z., Bauer, P.H., 2017. Effects of environmental factors on electric vehicle energy consumption: a sensitivity analysis. IET Electr. Syst. Transp. 7 (1), 3–13.
Yuan, Y., Li, Z., Huang, B., 2016. Robust optimization under correlated uncertainty: formulations and computational study. Comput. Chem. Eng. 85, 58–71.
